<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>A Plain Introduction to the Criticism of the New Testament, Vol. I.</title>
      <author><name reg="Scrivener, Frederick Henry Ambrose">Frederick Henry Ambrose Scrivener</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="4">Edition 4</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>June 28, 2011</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">36548</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="el"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2011-06-28">June 28, 2011</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Colin Bell, David King, CCEL, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">A Plain Introduction to the Criticism of the New Testament</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">For the Use of Biblical Students</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">By The Late</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Frederick Henry Ambrose Scrivener</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">M.A., D.C.L., LL.D.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Prebendary of Exeter, Vicar of Hendon</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Fourth Edition, Edited by</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">The Rev. Edward Miller, M.A.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Formerly Fellow and Tutor of New College, Oxford</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Vol. I.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">George Bell &amp; Sons, York Street, Covent Garden</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Londo, New York, and Cambridge </p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1894</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='iv'/><anchor id='Pgiv'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/frontispiece.png' rend='width: 60%'>
    <head>Frederick Henry Ambrose Scrivener</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
In templo Dei offert unusquisque quod potest: alii aurum, argentum, et lapides pretiosos: alii
byssum et purpuram et coccum offerunt et hyacinthum. Nobiscum bene agitur, si obtulerimus
pelles et caprarum pilos. Et tamen Apostolus contemtibiliora nostra magis necessaria judicat.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hieronymi</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Prologus Galeatus</hi>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='v'/><anchor id='Pgv'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>

<p>
Dedication
</p>

<p>
[In The Third Edition]
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>To His Grace</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Edward, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>My Lord Archbishop</hi>,
</p>

<p>
Nearly forty years ago, under encouragement from
your venerated predecessor Archbishop Howley, and with the
friendly help of his Librarian Dr. Maitland, I entered upon the
work of collating manuscripts of the Greek New Testament by
examining the copies brought from the East by Professor
Carlyle, and purchased for the Lambeth Library in 1805.
I was soon called away from this employment&mdash;ἑκὼν ἀέκοντί γε
θυμῷ&mdash;to less congenial duties in that remote county, wherein
long after it was your Grace's happy privilege to refresh the
spirits of Churchmen and Churchwomen, by giving them pious
work to do, and an example in the doing of it. What I have
since been able to accomplish in the pursuits of sacred criticism,
although very much less than I once anticipated, has proved,
I would fain hope, not without its use to those who love Holy
Scripture, and the studies which help to the understanding of
the same.
</p>

<p>
Among the scholars whose sympathy cheered and aided my
Biblical labours from time to time, I have had the honour of
including your Grace; yet it would be at once unseemly and
fallacious to assume from that circumstance, that the principles
of textual criticism which I have consistently advocated have
<pb n='vi'/><anchor id='Pgvi'/>
approved themselves to your judgement. All that I can look
for or desire in this respect is that I may seem to you to
have stated my case fairly and temperately, in earnest controversy
with opponents far my superiors in learning and dialectic
power, and for whom, in spite of literary differences, I entertain
deep respect and true regard.
</p>

<p>
My Lord, you have been called by Divine Providence to the
first place in our Communion, and have entered upon your
great office attended by the applauses, the hopeful wishes, and
the hearty prayers of the whole Church. May it please God to
endow you richly with the Christian gifts as well of wisdom as
of courage: for indeed the highest minister of the Church of
England, no less than the humblest, will need courage in the
coming time, now that faith is waxing cold and adversaries are
many.
</p>

<p>
I am, my Lord Archbishop,
</p>

<p>
Your obliged and faithful servant,
</p>

<p>
F. H. A. Scrivener.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hendon Vicarage</hi>,
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Whitsuntide</hi>, 1883.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='vii'/><anchor id='Pgvii'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Preface To Fourth Edition.</head>

<p>
At the time of the lamented death of Dr. Scrivener a new
edition of his standard work was called for, and it was supposed
that the great Master of Textual Criticism had himself made
sufficient corrections and additions for the purpose in the margin
of his copy. When the publishers committed to me the task
of preparation, I was fully aware of the absolute necessity of
going far beyond the materials placed at my disposal, if the book
were to be really useful as being abreast of the very great progress
accomplished in the last ten years. But it was not till
I had laboured with absolute loyalty for some months that
I discovered from my own observation, and from the advice
of some of the first textual critics, how much alteration must
at once be made.
</p>

<p>
Dr. Scrivener evidently prepared the Third Edition under
great disadvantage. He had a parish of more than 5,500 inhabitants
upon his hands, with the necessity of making provision for
increase in the population. The result was that after adding
125 pages to his book he had an attack of paralysis, and so
it is not surprising that his work was not wholly conducted
upon the high level of his previous publications. The book has
also laboured under another and greater disadvantage of too
rapid, though unavoidable, growth. The 506 pages of the
First Edition have been successively expanded into 626 pages
in the Second, 751 in the Third, and 874 in the Fourth; while
the framework originally adopted, consisting only of nine
chapters, was manifestly inadequate to the mass of material
ultimately gathered. It has therefore been found necessary, as
<pb n='viii'/><anchor id='Pgviii'/>
the work proceeded, to do violence, amidst much delicate
embarrassment, to feelings of loyalty to the author forbidding
alteration. The chief changes that have been made are as
follows:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
The first intention of keeping the materials within the
compass of one volume has been abandoned, and it has been
divided into two volumes, with an increase of chapters in each.
</p>

<p>
Instead of 2,094 manuscripts, as reckoned in the third
edition under the six classes, no less than 3,791 have been
recorded in this edition, being an increase of 236 beyond the
3,555 of Dr. Gregory, without counting the numerous vacant
places which have been filled up.
</p>

<p>
Most of the accounts of ancient versions have been rewritten
by distinguished scholars, who are leaders in their several
departments.
</p>

<p>
The early part of Volume I has been enriched from the
admirable book on <q>Greek and Latin Palaeography,</q> by Mr. E.
Maunde Thompson, who with great kindness placed the proof-sheets
at my disposal before publication.
</p>

<p>
Changes have been made in the headlines, the indexes, and
in the printing, and sometimes in the arrangement, which will,
I trust, enable the reader to find his way more easily about
the treatise.
</p>

<p>
And many corrections suggested by eminent scholars have
been introduced in different places all through the work.
</p>

<p>
A most pleasing duty now is to tender my best thanks to the
Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Salisbury and the Rev. H. J.
White, M.A., for the rewriting of the chapter on Latin Versions
by the latter under Dr. John Wordsworth's supervision, with
help from M. Samuel Berger; to the Rev. G. H. Gwilliam, B.D.,
Fellow of Hertford College, now editing the Peshitto for the
University of Oxford, for the improvement of the passages upon
the Peshitto and the Curetonian; the Rev. H. Deane, B.D., for
additions to the treatment of the Harkleian; and the Rev. Dr.
Walker, Principal of St. John's Hall, Highbury, for the results
of a collation of the Peshitto and Curetonian; to the Rev. A. C.
Headlam, M.A., Fellow of All Souls College, for a revision of the
<pb n='ix'/><anchor id='Pgix'/>
long chapter upon Egyptian Versions; to F. C. Conybeare, Esq.,
M.A., late Fellow of University College, for rewriting the sections
on the Armenian and Georgian Versions; to Professor
Margoliouth, M.A., Fellow of New College, for rewriting the
sections on the Arabic and Ethiopic Versions; to the Rev. Ll.
J. M. Bebb, M.A., Fellow of Brasenose College, for rewriting the
section upon the Slavonic Version; to Dr. James W. Bright,
Assistant-Professor in the Johns Hopkins University, for rewriting
the section on the Anglo-Saxon Version, through Mr. White's
kind offices; to E. Maunde Thompson, Esq., D.C.L., LL.D., F.S.A.,
&amp;c., for kindness already mentioned, and other help, and to G. F.
Warner, Esq., M.A., of the Manuscript Department of the British
Museum, for correction of some of the notices of cursive MSS.
belonging to the Museum, and for other assistance; to J. Rendel
Harris, Esq., M.A., Fellow of Clare College and Reader in
Palaeology in the University of Cambridge, for much help of a
varied nature; to Professor Isaac H. Hall, Ph.D., of New York
City, for sending and placing at my disposal many of his publications;
to the lamented Professor Bensly, for writing me a letter
upon the Syriac Versions; to the Rev. Nicholas Pocock, M.A.,
of Clifton, for some results of a collation of F and G of St. Paul;
to Professor Bernard, D.D., Trinity College, Dublin, for a paper
of suggestions; to the Rev. Walter Slater, M.A., for preparing
Index II in Vol. I; and to several other kind friends, for assistance
of various kinds freely given. The generosity of scholars
in communicating out of their stores of learning is a most
pleasing feature in the study of the present day. Whatever
may be my own shortcomings&mdash;and I fear that they have been
enhanced by limitations of time and space, and through the
effects of ill-health and sorrow&mdash;the contributions enumerated
cannot but render the present edition of Dr. Scrivener's great
work eminently useful to students.
</p>

<p>
Edward Miller.
</p>

<p>
9, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Bradmore Road, Oxford</hi>,
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>January 17, 1894</hi>.
</p>

<p>
[Transcriber's Note: This book contains much Greek text, which will not be
well-rendered in plain text versions of this E-book. Also, there is much use of
Greek characters with a vertical bar across the tops of the letters to indicate
abbreviations; because the coding system used in this e-book does not have such an
<q>overline</q>, they are rendered here with underlines.]
</p>

</div>

<pb n='xii'/><anchor id='Pgxii'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Description Of The Contents Of The
Lithographed Plates<note place='foot'>Unfortunately, it did not occur to us till after the work was nearly all in type
to transfer the Lithographed Plates to places opposite the pages which they chiefly
illustrate, and that in consequence a few expressions in the text ought to be
altered. The advantage of this arrangement appears to be so great as to overbalance
the slight inaccuracies alluded to, which cannot now be removed. The
plates and their references will, it is hoped, be found easily from the explanations
here given.</note>.</head>

<p>
[Transcriber's Note: The plates have been all placed in this section so that the
extended comments for each can be with the plates themselves.]

</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Plate_I'/>
Plate I
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-i.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Plate I.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>1. (1) Alphabet from the Rosetta Stone [<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 196], a specimen of capitals.</p>
<p>2. (2) Alphabet from Cod. Sinaiticus, specimen of uncials.</p>
<p>3. (3) Alphabet from Cod. Alexandrinus, specimen of uncials.</p>
</quote>

<p>
<anchor id='Plate_II'/>
Plate II
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-ii.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Plate II.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>1. (4) Alphabet from the Cotton Fragment (Evan. N) and Titus C. xv [vi],</p>
<p>2. (5) And from Cod. Nitriensis (Evan. R, Brit. Mus. Add. 17,211).</p>
</quote>

<p>
<anchor id='Plate_III'/>
Plate III
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-iii.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Plate II.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>1. (6) Alphabet from Cod. Dublinensis (Evan. Z).</p>
<p>2. (7) From Brit. Mus. Harl. 5598 (Evst. 150), [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 995].</p>
<p>3. (8) From Brit. Mus. Burney 19 (Evan. 569).
Note that above <hi rend='italic'>psi</hi> in 2 stands the cross-like form of that letter as found in Apoc., B. [viii].</p>
</quote>

<p>
<anchor id='Plate_IV'/>
Plate IV
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-iv.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Plate IV.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>1. (9) Extract from Hyperides' Oration for Lycophron, col. 15, 1. 23, &amp;c.
(Ὑπερίδου Λόγοι, ed. Babington, 1853). Dating between <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 100
to <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 100, on Egyptian papyrus, in a cursive or running hand.
λυντας τινα των πο|λιτων αδικως δεο|μαι υμων και ετωι|και αντιβολωι
κε|λευσαι καμε καλεσαι|τους συνερουντας &gt;. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> pp. <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>.</p>
<p>2. (10) Extract from Philodemus περὶ κακιῶν (<hi rend='italic'>Herculanensium voluminum
quae supersunt</hi>, fol., Tom. 3, Col. xx. ll. 6-15). <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> pp. <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>.
οντως πολυμαθεστατον προς | αγορευομενον οιεται παντα | δυνασθαι γινωσκειν
και ποι|ειν ουχ οιον εαυτον οσ ενιοισ | ουδεν τι φωραται κατεχων |
και ου συνορων οτι πολλα δει|ται τριβης αν και απο τησ αυ|τησ γινηται
μεθοδου καθα|περ τα τησ ποιητικησ μερη και | διοτι περι τουσ πολυμαθεισ.</p>
<pb n='xiii'/><anchor id='Pgxiii'/>
<p>3. (11<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>) Cod. Friderico-August. [iv], 2 Sam. vii. 10, 11, Septuagint:
σεαυτων καθωσ αρ|χησ και αφ ημερῶ | ων εταξα κριτασ | επι τον λαον
μου | <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ισλ</hi> και εταπινω|σα απαντασ τους | εχθρουσ σου και | αυξησω σε
και οι|.</p>
<p>4. (11<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>) Cod. Sinaiticus, א [iv], Luke xxiv. 33-4: τη ωρα ϋπεστρε|ψαν
εισ ϊερουσα|λημ<note place='foot'>In later manuscripts Proper Names are often distinguished by a horizontal
line placed over them, but no such examples occur in these Plates.</note> και ευρον η|θροισμενουσ τουσ | ενδεκα και τουσ | συν
αυτοισ λεγο|.</p>
<p>5. (11<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>c</hi>) Cod. Sin., 1 Tim. iii. 16, το τησ ευσεβειασ | μυστηριον οσ ε with a
recent correction. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> II. 391. There are no capital letters in
this Plate.</p>
</quote>

<p>
<anchor id='Plate_V'/>
Plate V
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-v.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Plate V.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>1. (12) Cod. Alexandrinus, A [v], Gen. i. 1-2, Septuagint. These four
lines are in bright red, with breathings and accents<note place='foot'>The reader will observe throughout these specimens that the breathings and
accents are usually attached to the <emph>first</emph> vowel of a diphthong.</note>. Henceforth
capital letters begin to appear. Εν ἀρχῆ ἐπόιησεν ὁ <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>θσ</hi> τὸν
ὀυ|ρανὸν και τὴν γῆν ἡ δὲ γῆ ἦν ἀό|ρατοσ κὰι ἀκατασκεύαστοσ; | και
σκότοσ ἐπάνω τῆσ αβύσσου.|</p>
<p>2. (13) Cod. Alex., Acts xx. 28, in common ink. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> II. 37. Προσεχετε
εαυτοισ και παντι τω | ποιμνιω; εν ω ϋμασ το <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>πνα</hi> το | αγιον εθετο
επισκοπουσ; | ποιμαινειν την εκκλησιαν | του <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>κυ</hi> ην περιεποιησατο δια |
του αιματος του ιδιου;|</p>
<p>3. (14) Cod. Cotton., Titus C. xv, Evan. N, with Ammonian section and
Eusebian canon in the margin. John xv. 20: του λογου ου |
εγω ειπον υ|μιν; ουκ εστιν | δουλοσ μιζῶ | του <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>κυ</hi> αυτου.</p>
</quote>

<p>
<anchor id='Plate_VI'/>
Plate VI
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-vi.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Plate VI.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>1. (15) Cod. Burney 21 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1292], Evan. 571. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> p. <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>. John xxi.
17-18: πρόβατά μου; ἀμὴν ἀμὴν λέγω σοι; | ὅτε ἦσ νεώτεροσ, ἐζώννϋεσ
ἑ|αυτὸν; καὶ περιεπάτησ ὅπου ἤθε|λεσ; ὅταν δε γηράσησ, ἐκτενεῖσ|.</p>
<p>2. (16) Cod. Arundel 547, Evst. 257 [ix or x]. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> p. <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>. The open work
indicates stops and musical notes in red. John viii. 13-14:
Αυτω ὁι θαρισᾶι | οι + σὺ περὶ σὲαυτου | μαρτυρεῖσ ἡ μαρ|τυρία σου
ὀυκ ἔσ|τιν ἀλῃθήσ + ἀπε|.</p>
<p>3. (17) Cod. Nitriensis, R of the Gospels, a palimpsest [vi]. Luke v. 26:
ξαζον τον θν | και επλησθη|σαν φοβου λε|γοντεσ οτι|.</p>
</quote>

<p>
<anchor id='Plate_VII'/>
Plate VII
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-vii.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Plate VII.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>1. (18) Cod. Dublin., Z of the Gospels, a palimpsest [vi], from Barrett.
Matt. xx. 33-4: ανοιγωσιν οι οφθαλ|μοι ημων | Σπλαγχνισθεισ δε ο
<hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ισ</hi> | ηψατο των ομματῶ | αυτων και ευθεωσ|.</p>
<p>2. (19) Cod. Cyprius, K of the Gospels [ix], John vi. 52-3: Ἐμάχοντο ὀῦν
προσ ἀλλήλουσ ὁι ϊουδαῖοι; λε|γοντεσ; πῶσ δύναται ὁῦτοσ ἡμῖν τὴν
σάρ|κα δοῦναι φαγεῖν; ἐῖπεν ὀῦν ἀυτοῖσ ὁ <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ισ</hi>; ἀ|. It has the
Ammonian section in the margin (ξς = 66), and a flourish in the
place of the Eusebian canon. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> p. <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>.</p>
</quote>

<pb n='xiv'/><anchor id='Pgxiv'/>

<p>
<anchor id='Plate_VIII'/>
Plate VIII
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-viii.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Plate VIII.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>(20) Cod. Vaticanus, B of the Gospels, Acts and Epistles [iv], taken from
Burgon's photograph of the whole page. Mark xvi. 3-8: μῖν
τὸν λίθον ἐκ τῆς | θύρασ τόυ μνημέῖου | κὰι ἀναβλέψασαι θεω|ροῦσιν
ὅτι ἀνακεκύ|λισται ὁ λιθοσ ἦν γὰρ | μέγασ σφόδρα κὰι ἐλ|θοῦσαι ἐισ τὸ
μνημεῖ|ον ἐῖδον νεανίσκον | καθήμενον ἐν τοῖσ | δεξιοῖσ περιβεβλημέ|νον
στολὴν λευκὴν | κὰι ἐξεθαμβήθησαν | ὁ δὲ λέγει ἀυτᾶισ μὴ | ἐκθαμβεῖσθε
ἰν ζητει|τε τὸν ναζαρηνὸν τὸ | ἐσταυρωμένον ἠγὲρ|θη ὀυκ
ἐστιν ὧδε ϊδε | ὁ τόποσ ὅπου ἔθηκᾶ | ἀυτὸν ἀλλα ϋπάγετε | ἐίπατε
τοῖσ μαθητᾶισ | ἀυτοῦ κὰι τῶ πέτρω | ὅτι προάγει ὑμᾶσ ἐισ | τὴν
γαλιλάιαν ἐκει ἀυ|τὸν ὄψεσθε καθὼσ ἐι|πεν ὑμῖν κὰι ἐξελθοῦ|σαι ἔφυγον
ἀπὸ τοῦ | μνημέιου ἐίχεν γὰρ | ἀυτὰσ τρόμοσ κὰι ἔκ|στασισ κὰι ὀυδενὶ
ὀυ|δὲν ἐῖπον ἐφοβοῦν|το γάρ: Here again, as in <ref target='Plate_IV'>Plate IV</ref>, no capital
letters appear. What follows on the Plate is by a later hand.</p>
</quote>

<p>
<anchor id='Plate_IX'/>
Plate IX
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-ix.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Plate IX.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>1. (21) Cod. Par. Nat. Gr. 62, Evan. L of the Gospels [viii], as also
3 (23) below, are from photographs given by Dean Burgon: see
pp. <ref target='Pg133'>133-4</ref>. In the first column stands Mark xvi. 8 with its
Ammonian section (σλγ 233) and Eusebian canon (β = 2): Καὶ
ἐξελθουσαι ἐ|φυγον ἀπο τοῦ | μνημειου + ἐι|χεν δὲ αὐτας τρο|μοσ καὶ
εκστασεισ; | καὶ ουδενι οὐδεν | εἰπον + ἐφοβουν|το γὰρ + In the
second column, after the strange note transcribed by us (II.
388), εστην δε και | ταῦτα φερο|μενα μετα το | ἑφοβουντο | γαρ + |
Ἀναστὰσ δὲ πρωϊ | πρωτη σαββατυ + (ver. 9) Xi much resembles
that in <ref target='Plate_XI'>Plate XI</ref>, No. 27.</p>
<p>2. (22) Cod. Nanianus, Evan. U, retraced after Tregelles. Burgon
(<hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, Oct. 29, 1873) considers this facsimile unworthy of
the original writing, which is <q>even, precise, and beautiful.</q>
Mark v. 18: Βάντοσ αυτου | ἐισ τὸ πλοῖο | παρεκάλει ἀυ|τὸν ὁ
δαιμο|νισθεισ ἵνα. The Ammonian section (μη = 48) is in the
margin with the Eusebian canon (Β, in error for Η) underneath.
The ν on the other side is by a much later hand. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> p. <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>.</p>
<p>3. (23) Cod. Basil. of the Gospels, Evan. 1 [x?]. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> p. <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>. Luke i. 1, 2.
(the title: ἐυαγγέ[λιον] κατὰ λουκᾶν: being under an elegant
arcade): Επειδήπερ πολλοὶ ἐπεχείρησαν ἀνατάξασθαι | διήγησιν περὶ
τῶν πεπληροφορημένων | ἐν ἡμῖν πραγματων. καθὼς παρέδοσαν ἡμῖ |
ὀι ἀπαρχῆσ αὐτόπται καὶ ὑπηρεται γενόμενοι|. The numeral in the
margin must indicate the Ammonian section, not the larger
κεφάλαιον (see p. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>).</p>
</quote>

<p>
<anchor id='Plate_X'/>
Plate X
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-x.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Plate X.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
1. (24) Cod. Ephraemi, C, a palimpsest [v], from Tischendorf's facsimile.
The upper writing [xii?] is τοῦ τὴν πληθῦν τῶν | ἐμῶν ἁμαρτημά ||
σομαι; οἶδα ὅτι μετὰ | τὴν γνῶσιν ἥμαρτον. Translated from St.
Ephraem the Syrian. The earlier text is 1 Tim. iii. 15-16: ωμα
τησ αληθείασ; | Και ομολογουμενωσ μέγα ἐστιν το τησ ἐυσεβειασ
μυ|στηριον; θσ ἑφανερωθη εν σαρκι; εδικαιωθη ἑν πνϊ. For the
accents, &amp;c., <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>.
</p>

<pb n='xv'/><anchor id='Pgxv'/>

<p>
2. (25) Cod. Laud. 35, E of the Acts [vi], Latin <emph>and</emph> Greek, in a sort of
stichometry. Acts xx. 28: regere | ecclesiam | domini || ποιμενειν |
την εκκλησιαν | του <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>κυ</hi>. Below are specimens of six letters taken
from other parts of the manuscript. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> p. <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>.
</p>

<p>
3. (26) Matt i. 1-3, Greek and Latin, from the Complutensian Polyglott,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1514. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> II. 176.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
<anchor id='Plate_XI'/>
Plate XI
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-xi.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Plate XI.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
1. (27) Cod. Basil., Evan. E [vii], from a photograph given by Dean
Burgon, Mark i. 5-6: Προσ αὐτὸν. πᾶσα ἡ ϊουδαία | χωρα. και οἱ
ἱεροσολυμῖται; | και ἐβαπτιζοντο παντεσ, | ἐν τὠ ἰορδάνη ποταμῶ ὑ|π᾽
ἀυτοῦ. ἐξομολογόυμε|νοι τὰσ ἁμαρτίασ αυτῶν; | Ἦν δε ὁ ϊωάννησ
ενδεδυμένοσ. The harmonizing references will be found underneath,
and some stops in the text (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>). The next two
specimens are retraced after Tregelles.
</p>

<p>
2. (28) Cod. Boreeli, Evan. F [viii-x], Mark x. 13 (Ammonian section only,
ρς = 106): Καὶ προσέφερον | αὐτῶ παιδία | ἵν ἅψηται ἀυ|τῶν; ὁι δὲ
μαθη|τὰι ἐπετίμων|.
</p>

<p>
3. (29) Cod. Harleian. 5684, Evan. G [x], Matt. v. 30-1: βληθη; εισ
γεεν|ναν; τέ τῆσ <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>λε</hi>. | Ἐρρηθη δέ; Ὅτι ὃσ | ἀν ἀπολυση την | γυνἀικα
ἀυτοῦ; | χαρ (ἀρχὴ) stands in the margin of the new Lesson.
</p>

<p>
4. (30) Cod. Bodleian., Λ of the Gospels [x or ix], in <emph>sloping</emph> uncials,
Luke xviii. 26, 27, and 30: σαντεσ; κὰι Τίσ, | δύναται σωθῆναι; | ὁ
δὲ <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ἰσ</hi>. ἐῖπεν; || τοῦτω; κὰι ἐν | τῶ ἀιῶνι τῶ ἐρ|χομένω ζωὴν|. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi>
p. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
<anchor id='Plate_XII'/>
Plate XII
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-xii.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Plate XII.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
1. (31) Cod. Wolfii B, Evan. H [ix], John i. 38-40: τοὺσ ἀκολουθοῦντασ
λέγει ἀυτοῖσ + τί ζη|τεῖτε + ὁι δε. ἐῖπον ἀυτῶ + ραββεί; ὃ λέγε|ται
ἐρμηνευόμενον διδάσκαλε ποῦ μέ|νεισ + λέγει ἀυτοῖσ + ἔρχεσθε και
ϊδετε + ἦλ|. Retraced after Tregelles: in the original the dark
marks seen in our facsimile are no doubt red musical notes.
</p>

<p>
2. (32) Cod. Campianus, Evan. M [ix], from a photograph of Burgon's.
John vii. 53-viii. 2: Καὶ ἐπορέυθησαν ἔκα|στοσ: ἐισ τὸν ὀῖκον |
ἀυτοῦ; <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ισ</hi> δὲ ἐπορεῦ|θη ἐισ τὸ ὄροσ τῶν ἐ|λαιῶν. ὄρθρου δὲ πά|.
Observe the asterisk set against the passage.
</p>

<p>
3. (33) Cod. Emman. Coll. Cantab., Act. 53, Paul. 30 [xii]. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> p. <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>.
This minute and elegant specimen, beginning Rom. v. 21, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>χυ</hi>
τοῦ <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>κυ</hi> ἡμων; and ending vi. 7, δεδικαίωται ἀ, is left to exercise
the reader's skill.
</p>

<p>
4. (34) Cod. Ruber., Paul. M [x]. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> p. <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>. 2 Cor. i. 3-5: παρακλήσεωσ;
ὁ παρακαλῶν | ἡμᾶσ ἐπί πάση Τῆι θλίψει; ἐισ τὸ | δύνασθαι ἡμᾶσ
παρακαλεῖν | τοὺσ ἐν πάση θλίψει διὰ τῆσ πα|ρακλήσεωσ ἧσ παρεκαλούμε|θα
ἀυτοὶ ὑπὸ τοῦ θῦ. ὅτι καθὼσ|.
</p>

<p>
5. (35) Cod. Bodleian., Evan. Γ of the Gospels [ix]. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> p. <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>. Mark viii.
33: πιστραφείσ καὶ ἰδὼν τουσ μα|θητὰσ ἀυτοῦ. ἐπετίμησεν τῶ |
πέτρω λέγων. ὕπαγε ὁπίσω μυ|.
</p>
</quote>

<pb n='xvi'/><anchor id='Pgxvi'/>

<p>
<anchor id='Plate_XIII'/>
Plate XIII
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-xiii.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Plate XIII.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1. (36) Parham. 18, Evst. 234 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 980], Luke ix. 84: γοντοσ ἐγένετο
νε|φέλη κὰι ἐπεσκίασεν | ἀυτοὺσ ἐφοβήθησᾱ|. Annexed are six
letters taken from other parts of the manuscript.
</p>

<p>
2. (37) Cod. Burney 22, Evst. 259 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1319]. The Scripture text is
Mark vii. 30: βεβλημέν ον ἐ|πὶ κλίνην κ | τὸ δαιμόνιον ἐξε|λἠλυθῶσ:&mdash;The
subscription which follows is given at length in
p. <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, note 3.
</p>

<p>
3. (38) Cod. Monacensis, Evan. X [ix], retraced after Tregelles. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> p. <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>.
Luke vii. 25-6: τίοισ ἠμφιεσμένον; ϊδου ὁι | ἐν ϊματισμώ ἐνδοξω και
τρυ|φῆ ὑπάρχοντεσ έν τοισ βασιλεί | οισ ἐισὶν; άλλὰ τί ἐξεληλυθα|.
</p>

<p>
4. (39) Cod. Par. Nat. Gr. 14, or Evan. 33: from a photograph of Burgon's.
<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> p. <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>. Luke i. 8-11: ξει τῆς ἐφημερίασ ἀυτοῦ ἔναντι τοῦ <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>κυ</hi>
κατὰ τὸ ἔθοσ τῆς ἱερατείασ. ἔλαχεν τοῦ θυμιᾶ|σαι εἰσελθὼν εἰς τὸν |
ὤρα τοῦ θυμιάματοσ. ὤφθη δε ἀυτῶ ἄγγελος <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>κυ</hi> ἐστὼσ ἐκδεξιὼν τοῦ
θυσιαστηρίου, τοῦ θυ|.
</p>

<p>
5. (40) Cod. Leicestrensis, Evan. 69, Paul. 37 [xiv]. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> p. <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>. 1 Tim. iii.
16: τῆς εὐσεβε(?)ίας μυστήριον; ὁ θό ἐφανερώθη ἐν σαρ|κί; ἐδικαιώθη
ἐν πνεύματι; ὤφθη ἀγγέλοις; | ἐκηρύχθη ἐν ἔπιςεύθη ἐν κόσμω;
ἀνελή&mdash;.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
<anchor id='Plate_XIV'/>
Plate XIV. Contains specimens of open leaves of the two chief bilingual
manuscripts
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-xiv.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Plate XIV.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
1. (41) Cod. Claromontanus or Paul. D (1 Cor. xiii. 5-8), p. <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>.
</p>

<p>
2. (42) Cod. Bezae or Evan, and Act. D (John xxi. 19-28), p. <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>. Observe
the stichometry, the breathings, &amp;c., of the Pauline facsimile
(which we owe to Dean Burgon's kindness). These codices, so
remarkably akin as well in their literary history as in their
style of writing and date (vi or v), will easily be deciphered by
the student.
</p>

<p>
3. (43) Cod. Rossanensis or Evan. Σ (p. <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>), is one of the most interesting,
as it is amongst the latest of our discoveries. Our passage
is Matt. vi. 18, 14: πονηρου οτι | σου εστιν η βα|σιλεια και η
δυ|ναμισ και η δο|ξα εισ τουσ αιω|νασ αμην.| Εαν γαρ αφητε | τοισ
<hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ανοισ</hi> τα | παραπτωματα|. In the margin below the capital Ε is
the Ammonian section μδ (44) and the Eusebian canon ς (66):
ανοισ is an abbreviation for ἀνθρώποις. All is written in silver
on fine purple vellum.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
<anchor id='Plate_XV'/>
Plate XV
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/plate-xv.png' rend='width: 80%'>
    <head>Plate XV.</head>
    <figDesc>Illustration.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
Cod. Beratinus or Evan. Φ, Matt. xxvi. 19-20: ως συνεταξεν | αυτοις ϊς και
ητοιμασαν το | πασχα; | Οψιας δε γενομενης ανε|κειτο μετα των |
δωδεκα μαθη|των; και αισθι|. Observe the reference given for
the paragraph to the Ammonian section and Eusebian canon
on the left: σοθ = 279, δ = 4. The MS. is written in two columns,
and the initial letters of each line are exhibited on the right,
with <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, σπα = 279, and β = 2; which as in the other
case are in a different hand.
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<pb n='xvii'/><anchor id='Pgxvii'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Addenda Et Corrigenda.</head>

<p>
Pages 1-224, <hi rend='italic'>passim</hi>, for reasons given in Vol. II. 96 note, <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> Memphitic <hi rend='italic'>read</hi>
Bohairic; <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> Thebaic <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> Sahidic.
</p>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, l. 25, <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> Chapter XI <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> Chapter XII.
</p>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, l. 20, <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> Chapter X <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> Chapter XI.
</p>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, l. 19, <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> Synaxaria <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> Menologies.
</p>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, ll. 11 and 12 from bottom, <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> 93 <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> 94; <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> Memoranda in our
Addenda <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> ingenious argument in n. 1.
</p>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>f</hi> Horner, <hi rend='italic'>add</hi> now in the Bodleian at Oxford.
</p>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>, l. 3 from bottom, <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> 464 <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> iv. 64.
</p>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, Evan. 250, l. 3, <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> p. 144 <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> p. 150.
</p>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>, Evan. 274, l. 2 from end, <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> Chapter IX <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> Chapter XII.
</p>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>, l. 6 from bottom, <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> Bibl. Gr. L. <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> Bibl. Gr. d.
</p>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>, l. 1, <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> 41 <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> 4.
</p>

<p>
P. <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref>, l. 12, <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> Ev. 1 (2) <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> Ev. 1 (1).
</p>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. Preliminary Considerations.</head>

<p>
1. When God was pleased to make known to man His
purpose of redeeming us through the death of His
Son, He employed for this end the general laws, and worked
according to the ordinary course of His Providential government,
so far as they were available for the furtherance of His merciful
design. A revelation from heaven, in its very notion, implies
supernatural interposition; yet neither in the first promulgation
nor in the subsequent propagation of Christ's religion, can we
mark any <emph>waste</emph> of miracles. So far as they were needed for the
assurance of honest seekers after truth, they were freely resorted
to: whensoever the principles which move mankind in the affairs
of common life were adequate to the exigences of the case, more
unusual and (as we might have thought) more powerful means
of producing conviction were withheld, as at once superfluous
and ineffectual. Those who heard not Moses and the prophets
would scarcely be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.
</p>

<p>
2. As it was with respect to the <emph>evidences</emph> of our faith, so
also with regard to the volume of Scripture. God willed that
His Church should enjoy the benefit of His written word, at
once as a rule of doctrine and as a guide unto holy living. For
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
this cause He so enlightened the minds of the Apostles and
Evangelists by His Spirit, that they recorded what He had
imprinted on their hearts or brought to their remembrance, without
the risk of error in anything essential to the verity of the
Gospel. But this main point once secured, the rest was left,
in a great measure, to themselves. The style, the tone, the
language, perhaps the special occasion of writing, seem to have
depended much on the taste and judgement of the several penmen.
Thus in St. Paul's Epistles we note the profound thinker,
the great scholar, the consummate orator: St. John pours forth
the simple utterings of his gentle, untutored, affectionate soul:
in St. Peter's speeches and letters may be traced the impetuous
earnestness of his noble yet not faultless character. Their individual
tempers and faculties and intellectual habits are clearly
discernible, even while they are speaking to us in the power and
by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost.
</p>

<p>
3. Now this self-same parsimony in the employment of
miracles which we observe with reference to Christian evidences
and to the inspiration of Scripture, we might look for beforehand,
from the analogy of divine things, when we proceed to consider
the methods by which Scripture has been preserved and handed
down to us. God <emph>might</emph>, if He would, have stamped His revealed
will visibly on the heavens, that all should read it there: He
<emph>might</emph> have so completely filled the minds of His servants the
Prophets and Evangelists, that they should have become mere
passive instruments in the promulgation of His counsel, and the
writings they have delivered to us have borne no traces whatever
of their individual characters: but for certain causes which we
can perceive, and doubtless for others beyond the reach of our
capacities, He has chosen to do neither the one nor the other.
And so again with the subject we propose to discuss in the
present work, namely, the relation our existing text of the New
Testament bears to that which originally came from the hands of
the sacred penmen. Their autographs <emph>might</emph> have been preserved
in the Church as the perfect standards by which all accidental
variations of the numberless copies scattered throughout the
world should be corrected to the end of time: but we know that
these autographs perished utterly in the very infancy of Christian
history. Or if it be too much to expect that the autographs
of the inspired writers should escape the fate which has overtaken
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
that of every other known relique of ancient literature,
God <emph>might</emph> have so guided the hand or fixed the devout attention
both of copyists during the long space of fourteen hundred years
before the invention of printing, and of compositors and printers
of the Bible for the last four centuries, that no jot or tittle
should have been changed of all that was written therein. Such
a course of Providential arrangement we must confess to be
quite possible, but it could have been brought about and maintained
by nothing short of a continuous, unceasing miracle;&mdash;by
making fallible men (nay, many such in every generation) for
one purpose absolutely infallible. If the complete identity of all
copies of Holy Scripture prove to be a fact, we must of course
receive it as such, and refer it to its sole Author: yet we may
confidently pronounce beforehand, that such a fact could not
have been reasonably anticipated, and is not at all agreeable to
the general tenour of God's dealings with us.
</p>

<p>
4. No one who has taken the trouble to examine any two
editions of the Greek New Testament needs be told that this
supposed complete resemblance in various copies of the holy
books is not founded on fact. Even several impressions derived
from the same standard edition, and professing to exhibit a text
positively the same, differ from their archetype and from each
other, in errors of the press which no amount of care or diligence
has yet been able to get rid of. If we extend our researches to
the manuscript copies of Scripture or of its versions which
abound in every great library in Christendom, we see in the
very best of them variations which we must at once impute to
the fault of the scribe, together with many others of a graver
and more perplexing nature, regarding which we can form no
probable judgement, without calling to our aid the resources of
critical learning. The more numerous and venerable the documents
within our reach, the more extensive is the view we
obtain of the variations (or <hi rend='smallcaps'>various readings</hi> as they are
called) that prevail in manuscripts. If the number of these
variations was rightly computed at thirty thousand in Mill's
time, a century and a half ago, they must at present amount
to at least fourfold that quantity.
</p>

<p>
5. As the New Testament far surpasses all other remains of
antiquity in value and interest, so are the copies of it yet existing
in manuscript and dating from the fourth century of our
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
era downwards, far more numerous than those of the most celebrated
writers of Greece or Rome. Such as have been already
discovered and set down in catalogues are hardly fewer than three
thousand six hundred, and more must still linger unknown in the
monastic libraries of the East. On the other hand, manuscripts
of the most illustrious classic poets and philosophers are far
rarer and comparatively modern. We have no complete copy of
Homer himself prior to the thirteenth century, though some considerable
fragments have been recently brought to light which
may plausibly be assigned to the fifth century; while more than
one work of high and deserved repute has been preserved to our
times only in a single copy. Now the experience we gain from
a critical examination of the few classical manuscripts that
survive should make us thankful for the quality and abundance
of those of the New Testament. These last present us with a vast
and almost inexhaustible supply of materials for tracing the
history, and upholding (at least within certain limits) the purity
of the sacred text: every copy, if used diligently and with judgement,
will contribute somewhat to these ends. So far is the
copiousness of our stores from causing doubt or perplexity to the
genuine student of Holy Scripture, that it leads him to recognize
the more fully its general integrity in the midst of partial variation.
What would the thoughtful reader of Aeschylus give for
the like guidance through the obscurities which vex his patience,
and mar his enjoyment of that sublime poet?
</p>

<p>
6. In regard to modern works, it is fortunate that the art
of printing has wellnigh superseded the use of <emph>verbal</emph> or (as
it has been termed) <emph>Textual</emph> criticism. When a book once
issues from the press, its author's words are for the most part
fixed, beyond all danger of change; graven as with an iron
pen upon the rock for ever. Yet even in modern times, as in
the case of Barrow's posthumous works and Pepys's Diary and
Lord Clarendon's History of the Rebellion, it has been occasionally
found necessary to correct or enlarge the early editions, from
the original autographs, where they have been preserved. The
text of some of our older English writers (Beaumont and
Fletcher's plays are a notable instance) would doubtless have
been much improved by the same process, had it been possible;
but the criticism of Shakespeare's dramas is perhaps the most
delicate and difficult problem in the whole history of literature
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
since that great genius was so strangely contemptuous of the
praise of posterity, that even of the few plays that were
published in his lifetime the text seems but a gathering from
the scraps of their respective parts which had been negligently
copied out for the use of the actors.
</p>

<p>
7. The design of the science of <hi rend='smallcaps'>Textual criticism</hi>, as applied
to the Greek New Testament, will now be readily understood.
By collecting and comparing and weighing the variations of the
text to which we have access, it aims at bringing back that
text, so far as may be, to the condition in which it stood in the
sacred autographs; at removing all spurious additions, if such
be found in our present printed copies; at restoring whatsoever
may have been lost or corrupted or accidentally changed in the
lapse of eighteen hundred years. We need spend no time in
proving the value of such a science, if it affords us a fair
prospect of appreciable results, resting on grounds of satisfactory
evidence. Those who believe the study of the Scriptures to be
alike their duty and privilege, will surely grudge no pains when
called upon to separate the pure gold of God's word from the
dross which has mingled with it through the accretions of so
many centuries. Though the criticism of the sacred volume is
inferior to its right interpretation in point of dignity and
practical results, yet it must take precedence in order of time:
for how can we reasonably proceed to investigate the sense of
holy writ, till we have done our utmost to ascertain its precise
language?
</p>

<p>
8. The importance of the study of Textual criticism is
sometimes freely admitted by those who deem its successful
cultivation difficult, or its conclusions precarious; the rather as
Biblical scholars of deserved repute are constantly putting forth
their several recensions of the text, differing not a little from
each other. Now on this point it is right to speak clearly and
decidedly. There is certainly nothing in the nature of critical
science which ought to be thought hard or abstruse, or even
remarkably dry and repulsive. It is conversant with varied,
curious, and interesting researches, which have given a certain
serious pleasure to many intelligent minds; it patiently gathers
and arranges those facts of <emph>external</emph> evidence on which alone it
ventures to construct a revised text, and applies them according
to rules or canons of <emph>internal</emph> evidence, whether suggested by
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
experience, or resting for their proof on the plain dictates of
common sense. The more industry is brought to these studies,
the greater the store of materials accumulated, so much the
more fruitful and trustworthy the results have usually proved;
although beyond question the true application even of the
simplest principles calls for discretion, keenness of intellect,
innate tact ripened by constant use, a sound and impartial
judgement. No man ever attained eminence in this, or in any
other worthy accomplishment, without much labour and some
natural aptitude for the pursuit; but the criticism of the Greek
Testament is a field in whose culture the humblest student may
contribute a little that shall be really serviceable; few branches
of theology are able to promise, even to those who seek but
a moderate acquaintance with it, so early and abundant reward
for their pains.
</p>

<p>
9. Nor can Textual criticism be reasonably disparaged as
tending to precarious conclusions, or helping to unsettle the
text of Scripture. Even putting the matter on the lowest
ground, critics have not <emph>created</emph> the variations they have discovered
in manuscripts or versions. They have only taught
us how to look ascertained phenomena in the face, and try to
account for them; they would fain lead us to estimate the
relative value of various readings, to decide upon their respective
worth, and thus at length to eliminate them. While we
confess that much remains to be done in this department of
Biblical learning, we are yet bound to say that, chiefly by the
exertions of scholars of the last and present generations, the
debateable ground is gradually becoming narrower, not a few
strong controversies have been decided beyond the possibility of
reversal, and while new facts are daily coming to light, critics of
very opposite sympathies are learning to agree better as to the
right mode of classifying and applying them. But even were
the progress of the science less hopeful than we believe it to be,
one great truth is admitted on all hands;&mdash;the almost complete
freedom of Holy Scripture from the bare suspicion of wilful
corruption; the absolute identity of the testimony of every
known copy in respect to doctrine, and spirit, and the main
drift of every argument and every narrative through the entire
volume of Inspiration. On a point of such vital moment I am
glad to cite the well-known and powerful statement of the great
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
Bentley, at once the profoundest and the most daring of English
critics: <q>The real text of the sacred writers does not now (since
the originals have been so long lost) lie in any MS. or edition,
but is dispersed in them all. 'Tis competently exact indeed in
the worst MS. now extant; nor is one article of faith or moral
precept either perverted or lost in them; choose as awkwardly
as you will, choose the worst by design, out of the whole lump
of readings.</q> And again: <q>Make your 30,000 [variations] as
many more, if numbers of copies can ever reach that sum: all
the better to a knowing and a serious reader, who is thereby
more richly furnished to select what he sees genuine. But even
put them into the hands of a knave or a fool, and yet with the
most sinistrous and absurd choice, he shall not extinguish the
light of any one chapter, nor so disguise Christianity, but that
every feature of it will still be the same<note place='foot'><q>Remarks upon a late Discourse of Free Thinking by Phileleutherus
Lipsiensis,</q> Part i, Section 32.</note>.</q> Thus hath God's
Providence kept from harm the treasure of His written word,
so far as is needful for the quiet assurance of His church and
people.
</p>

<p>
10. It is now time for us to afford to the uninitiated reader
some general notion of the nature and extent of the various
readings met with in manuscripts and versions of the Greek
Testament. We shall try to reduce them under a few distinct
heads, reserving all formal discussion of their respective characters
and of the authenticity of the texts we cite for the next
volume (Chapter XI).
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Chapter_I_Section_10_Class_1'/>
(1) To begin with variations of the gravest kind. In two,
though happily in only two instances, the genuineness of whole
passages of considerable extent, which are read in our printed
copies of the New Testament, has been brought into question.
These are the weighty and characteristic paragraphs Mark xvi.
9-20 and John vii. 53-viii. 11. We shall hereafter defend
these passages, the first without the slightest misgiving, the
second with certain reservations, as entitled to be regarded
authentic portions of the Gospels in which they stand.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Chapter_I_Section_10_Class_2'/>
(2) Akin to these omissions are several considerable interpolations,
which, though they have never obtained a place in
the printed text, nor been approved by any critical editor, are
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
supported by authority too respectable to be set aside without
some inquiry. One of the longest and best attested of these
paragraphs has been appended to Matt. xx. 28, and has been
largely borrowed from other passages in the Gospels (see below,
class <ref target='Chapter_I_Section_10_Class_9'>9</ref>). It appears in several forms, slightly varying from each
other, and is represented as follows in a document as old as the
fifth century:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>But you, seek ye that from little things ye may become
great, and not from great things may become little. Whenever
ye are invited to the house of a supper, be not sitting down in
the honoured place, lest should come he that is more honoured
than thou, and to thee the Lord of the supper should say, Come
near below, and thou be ashamed in the eyes of the guests.
But if thou sit down in the little place, and he that is less than
thee should come, and to thee the Lord of the supper shall say,
Come near, and come up and sit down, thou also shalt have
more glory in the eyes of the guests<note place='foot'>I cite from the late Canon Cureton's over-literal translation in his <q>Remains
of a very antient recension of the four Gospels in Syriac,</q> in the Preface to
which (pp. xxxv-xxxviii) is an elaborate discussion of the evidence for this
passage.</note>.</q>
</quote>

<p>
We subjoin another paragraph, inserted after Luke vi. 4 in
only a single copy, the celebrated Codex Bezae, now at Cambridge:
<q>On the same day he beheld a certain man working on
the sabbath, and said unto him, Man, blessed art thou if thou
knowest what thou doest; but if thou knowest not, thou art
cursed and a transgressor of the law.'</q>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Chapter_I_Section_10_Class_3'/>
(3) A shorter passage or mere clause, whether inserted or not in
our printed books, may have appeared originally in the form of
a marginal note, and from the margin have crept into the text,
through the wrong judgement or mere oversight of the scribe.
Such we have reason to think is the history of 1 John v. 7, the
verse relating to the Three Heavenly Witnesses, once so earnestly
maintained, but now generally given up as spurious. Thus too
Acts viii. 37 may have been derived from some Church Ordinal:
the last clause of Rom. viii. 1 (μὴ κατὰ σάρκα περιπατοῦσιν, ἀλλὰ
κατὰ πνεῦμα) is perhaps like a gloss on τοῖς ἐν Χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ: εἰκῆ
in Matt. v. 22<note place='foot'>But see Dean Burgon's <q>The Revision Revised,</q> pp. 358-361.</note> and ἀναξίως in 1 Cor. xi. 29 might have been
inserted to modify statements that seemed too strong: τῇ ἀληθείᾳ
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
μὴ πείθεσθαι Gal. iii. 1 is precisely such an addition as would
help to round an abrupt sentence (compare Gal. v. 7). Some
critics would account in this way for the adoption of the
doxology Matt. vi. 13; of the section relating to the bloody
sweat Luke xxii. 43, 44; and of that remarkable verse,
John v. 4: but we may well hesitate before we assent to their
views.
</p>

<p>
(4) Or a genuine clause is lost by means of what is technically
called Homoeoteleuton (ὁμοιοτέλευτον), when the clause ends in
the same word as closed the preceding sentence, and the transcriber's
eye has wandered from the one to the other, to the
entire omission of the whole passage lying between them. This
source of error (though too freely appealed to by Meyer and
some other commentators hardly less eminent than he) is
familiar to all who are engaged in copying writing, and is far
more serious than might be supposed prior to experience. In
1 John ii. 23 ὁ ὁμολογῶν τὸν υἱὸν καὶ τὸν πατέρα ἔχει is omitted
in many manuscripts, because τὸν πατέρα ἔχει had ended the
preceding clause: it is not found in our commonly received
Greek text, and even in the Authorized English version is
printed in italics. The whole verse Luke xvii. 36, were it less
slenderly supported, might possibly have been early lost through
the same cause, since vv. 34, 35, 36 all end in ἀφεθήσεται. A safer
example is Luke xviii. 39, which a few copies omit for this
reason only. Thus perhaps we might defend in Matt. x. 23
the addition after φεύγετε εἰς τὴν ἄλλην of κἂν ἐν τῇ ἑτέρᾳ διώκωσιν
ὑμᾶς, φεύγετε εἰς τὴν ἄλλην (ἑτέραν being substituted for the first
ἄλλην), the eye having passed from the first φεύγετε εἰς τήν to the
second. The same effect is produced, though less frequently,
when two or more sentences <emph>begin</emph> with the same words, as in
Matt. xxiii. 14, 15, 16 (each of which commences with οὐαὶ
ὑμῖν), one of the verses being left out in some manuscripts.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Chapter_I_Section_10_Class_5'/>
(5) Numerous variations occur in the order of words, the sense
being slightly or not at all affected; on which account this
species of various readings was at first much neglected by
collators. Examples abound everywhere: e.g. τὶ μέρος or μέρος
τι Luke xi. 36; ὀνόματι Ἀνανίαν or Ἀνανίαν ὀνόματι Acts ix. 12;
ψυχρὸς οὔτε ζεστός or ζεστὸς οὔτε ψυχρός Apoc. iii. 16. The order
of the sacred names Ἰησοῦς Χριστός is perpetually changed,
especially in St. Paul's Epistles.
</p>

<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>

<p>
(6) Sometimes the scribe has mistaken one word for another,
which differs from it only in one or two letters. This happens
chiefly in cases when the <emph>uncial</emph> or capital letters in which the
oldest manuscripts are written resemble each other, except in
some fine stroke which may have decayed through age. Hence
in Mark v. 14 we find ΑΝΗΓΓΕΙΛΑΝ or ΑΠΗΓΓΕΙΛΑΝ; in
Luke xvi. 20 ΗΛΚΩΜΕΝΟΣ or ΕΙΛΚΩΜΕΝΟΣ; so we read Δαυίδ
or Δαβίδ indifferently, as, in the later or <emph>cursive</emph> character, β and
υ have nearly the same shape. Akin to these errors of the eye
are such transpositions as ΕΛΑΒΟΝ for ΕΒΑΛΟΝ or ΕΒΑΛΛΟΝ,
Mark xiv. 65: omissions or insertions of the same or similar
letters, as ΕΜΑΣΣΩΝΤΟ or ΕΜΑΣΩΝΤΟ Apoc. xvi. 10: ΑΓΑΛΛΙΑΣΘΗΝΑΙ
or ΑΓΑΛΛΙΑΘΗΝΑΙ John v. 35: and the dropping
or repetition of the same or a similar syllable, as ΕΚΒΑΛΛΟΝΤΑΔΑΙΜΟΝΙΑ
or ΕΚΒΑΛΛΟΝΤΑΤΑΔΑΙΜΟΝΙΑ Luke ix. 49;
ΟΥΔΕΔΕΔΟΞΑΣΤΑΙ or ΟΥΔΕΔΟΞΑΣΤΑΙ 2 Cor. iii. 10; ΑΠΑΞΕΞΕΔΕΧΕΤΟ
or ΑΠΕΞΕΔΕΧΕΤΟ 1 Pet. iii. 20. It is easy to
see how the ancient practice of writing uncial letters without
leaving a space between the words must have increased the risk
of such variations as the foregoing.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Chapter_I_Section_10_Class_7'/>
(7) Another source of error is described by some critics as
proceeding <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex ore dictantis</foreign>, in consequence of the scribe writing
from dictation, without having a copy before him. One is not,
however, very willing to believe that manuscripts of the better
class were executed on so slovenly and careless a plan. It seems
more simple to account for the <emph>itacisms</emph><note place='foot'>The word ἡτακισμός or ἰτακισμός is said to have been first used by Cassiodorus
(<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 468-560?). See Migne, Patr. Lat. t. 70, col. 1128.</note> or confusion of certain
vowels and diphthongs having nearly the same sound, which
exist more or less in manuscripts of every age, by assuming that
a vicious pronunciation gradually led to a loose mode of orthography
adapted to it. Certain it is that itacisms are much more
plentiful in the original subscriptions and marginal notes of the
writers of mediaeval books, than in the text which they copied
from older documents. Itacisms prevailed the most extensively
from the eighth to the twelfth century, but not by any means
during that period exclusively:&mdash;indeed, they are found frequently
in the oldest existing manuscripts. In the most ancient manuscripts
the principal changes are between ι and ει, αι and ε,
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
though others occur: in later times η ι and ει, η οι and υ, even ο
and ω, η and ε, are used almost promiscuously. Hence it arises
that a very large portion of the various readings brought together
by collators are of this description, and although in the vast
majority of instances they serve but to illustrate the character
of the manuscripts which exhibit them, or the fashion of the age
in which they were written, they sometimes affect the grammatical
form (e.g. ἔγειρε or ἔγειραι Mark iii. 3; Acts iii. 6;
<hi rend='italic'>passim</hi>: ἴδετε or εἴδετε Phil. i. 30), or the construction (e.g.
ἰάσωμαι or ἰάσομαι Matt. xiii. 15: οὐ μὴ τιμήσῃ or οὐ μὴ τιμήσει
Matt. xv. 5: ἵνα καυθήσωμαι or ἵνα καυθήσομαι 1 Cor. xiii. 3,
compare 1 Pet. iii. 1), or even the sense (e.g. ἑταίροις or ἑτέροις
Matt. xi. 16: μετὰ διωγμῶν or, as in a few copies, μετὰ διωγμόν
Mark x. 30: καυχᾶσθαι δὴ οὐ συμφέρει or καυχᾶσθαι δεῖ; οὐ συμφέρει
2 Cor. xii. 1: ὅτι χρηστὸς ὁ Κύριος or ὅτι χριστὸς ὁ Κύριος
1 Pet. ii. 3). To this cause we may refer the perpetual interchange
of ἡμεῖς and ὑμεῖς, with their oblique cases, throughout
the whole Greek Testament: e.g. in the single epistle of
1 Peter, ch. i. 3; 12; ii. 21 <hi rend='italic'>bis</hi>; iii. 18; 21; v. 10. Hence we
must pay the less regard to the reading ἡμέτερον Luke xvi. 12,
though found in two or three of our chief authorities: in Acts
xvii. 28 τῶν καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς, the reading of the great Codex Vaticanus
and a few late copies, is plainly absurd. On the other
hand, a few cases occur wherein that which at first sight
seems a mere <emph>itacism</emph>, when once understood, affords an excellent
sense, e.g. καθαρίζων Mark iii. 19, and may be really the true
form.
</p>

<p>
(8) Introductory clauses or Proper Names are frequently
interpolated at the commencement of Church-lessons (περικοπαί),
whether from the margin of ordinary manuscripts of the Greek
Testament (where they are usually placed for the convenience
of the reader), or from the Lectionaries or proper Service Books,
especially those of the Gospels (Evangelistaria). Thus in our
English Book of Common Prayer the name of Jesus is introduced
into the Gospels for the 14th, 16th, 17th, and 18th Sundays
after Trinity; and whole clauses into those for the 3rd and
4th Sundays after Easter, and the 6th and 24th after Trinity<note place='foot'>To this list of examples from the Book of Common Prayer, Dean Burgon
(<q>The last twelve verses of St. Mark's Gospel Vindicated</q> p. 215) adds the Gospels
for Quinquagesima, 2nd Sunday after Easter, 9th, 12th, and 22nd after Trinity,
Whitsunday, Ascension Day, SS. Philip and James, All Saints.</note>.
To this cause may be due the prefix εἶπε δὲ ὁ Κύριος Luke
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
vii. 31; καὶ στραφεὶς πρὸς τοὺς μαθητὰς εἶπε Luke x. 22; and
such appellations as ἀδελφοί or τέκνον Τιμόθεε (after σὺ δέ in
2 Tim. iv. 5) in some copies of the Epistles. The inserted
prefix in Greek Lectionaries is sometimes rather long, as in the
lesson for the Liturgy on Sept. 14 (John xix. 6-35). Hence the
frequent interpolation (e.g. Matt. iv. 18; viii. 5; xiv. 22) or
changed position (John i. 44) of Ἰησοῦς. A peculiarity of style
in 1, 2 Thess. is kept out of sight by the addition of Χριστός
in the common text of 1 Thess. ii. 19; iii. 13: 2 Thess.
i. 8, 12.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Chapter_I_Section_10_Class_9'/>
(9) A more extensive and perplexing species of various
readings arises from bringing into the text of one of the three
earlier Evangelists expressions or whole sentences which of
right belong not to him, but to one or both the others<note place='foot'>Dean Alford (see his critical notes on Luke ix. 56; xxiii. 17) is reasonably
unwilling to admit this source of corruption, where the language of the several
Evangelists bears no close resemblance throughout the whole of the parallel
passages.</note>. This
natural tendency to assimilate the several Gospels must have
been aggravated by the laudable efforts of Biblical scholars
(beginning with Tatian's Διὰ τεσσάρων in the second century)
to construct a satisfactory Harmony of them all. Some of these
variations also may possibly have been mere marginal notes in
the first instance. As examples of this class we will name εἰς
μετάνοιαν interpolated from Luke v. 32 into Mark ii. 17: the
prophetic citation Matt. xxvii. 35 ἵνα πληρωθῇ κ.τ.λ. to the
end of the verse, unquestionably borrowed from John xix. 24,
although the fourth Gospel seldom lends itself to corruptions of
this kind. Mark xiii. 14 τὸ ῥηθὲν ὑπὸ Δανιὴλ τοῦ προφήτου, is
probably taken from Matt. xxiv. 15: Luke v. 38 καὶ ἀμφότεροι
συντηροῦνται from Matt. ix. 17 (where ἀμφότεροι is the true
reading): the whole verse Mark xv. 28 seems spurious, being
received from Luke xxii. 37. Even in the same book we observe
an anxiety to harmonize two separate narratives of the same
event, as in Acts ix. 5, 6 compared with xxvi. 14, 15.
</p>

<p>
(10) In like manner transcribers sometimes quote passages
from the Old Testament more fully than the writers of the New
Testament had judged necessary for their purpose. Thus ἐγγίζει
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
μοι ... τῷ στόματι αὐτῶν καί Matt. xv. 8: ἰάσασθαι τοὺς συντετριμμένους
τὴν καρδίαν Luke iv. 18: αὐτοῦ ἀκούσεσθε Acts vii. 37:
οὐ ψευδομαρτυρήσεις Rom. xiii. 9; ἤ βολίδι κατατοξευθήσεται Heb. xii.
20, and (less certainly) καὶ κατέστησας αὐτὸν ἐπὶ τὰ ἔργα τῶν χειρῶν
σου Heb. ii. 7, are all open to suspicion as being genuine portions
of the Old Testament text, but not also of the New. In Acts xiii.
33, the Codex Bezae at Cambridge stands almost alone in adding
Ps. ii. 8 to that portion of the previous verse which was unquestionably
cited by St. Paul.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Chapter_I_Section_10_Class_11'/>
(11) Synonymous words are often interchanged, and so form
various readings, the sense undergoing some slight and refined
modification, or else being quite unaltered. Thus ἔφη should be
preferred to εἶπεν Matt. xxii. 37, where εἶπεν of the common
text is supported only by two known manuscripts, that at
Leicester, and one used by Erasmus. So also ὀμμάτων is put for
ὀφθαλμῶν Matt. ix. 29 by the Codex Bezae. In Matt. xxv. 16
the evidence is almost evenly balanced between ἐποίησεν and
ἐκέρδησεν (cf. ver. 17). Where simple verbs are interchanged
with their compounds (e.g. μετρηθήσεται with ἀντιμετρηθήσεται
Matt. vii. 2; ἐτέλεσεν with συνετέλεσεν <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> ver. 28; καίεται
with κατακαίεται xiii. 40), or different tenses of the same verb
(e.g. εἰληφώς with λαβών Acts xiv. 24; ἀνθέστηκε with ἀντέστη
2 Tim. iv. 15), there is usually some <emph>internal</emph> reason why one
should be chosen rather than the other, if the <emph>external</emph> evidence
on the other side does not greatly preponderate. When one of
two terms is employed in a sense peculiar to the New Testament
dialect, the easier synonym may be suspected of having originated
in a gloss or marginal interpretation. Hence <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>caeteris
paribus</foreign> we should adopt δικαιοσύνην rather than ἐλεημοσύνην in
Matt. vi. 1; ἐσκυλμένοι rather than ἐκλελυμένοι ix. 36; ἀθῶον
rather than δίκαιον xxvii. 4.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Chapter_I_Section_10_Class_12'/>
(12) An irregular, obscure, or incomplete construction will
often be <emph>explained</emph> or <emph>supplied</emph> in the margin by words that are
subsequently brought into the text. Of this character is ἐμέμψαντο
Mark vii. 2; δέξασθαι ἡμᾶς 2 Cor. viii. 4; γράφω xiii. 2;
προσλαβοῦ Philem. 12 (compare ver. 17), and perhaps δῆλον 1 Tim.
vi. 7. More considerable is the change in Acts viii. 7, where the
true reading πολλοὶ ... φωνῇ μεγάλῃ ἐξήρχοντο, if translated with
grammatical rigour, affords an almost impossible sense. Or an
elegant Greek idiom may be transformed into simpler language,
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
as in Acts xvi. 3 ᾔδεισαν γὰρ πάντες ὅτι Ἕλλην ὁ πατὴρ αὐτοῦ ὑπῆρχεν
for ᾔδεισαν γὰρ ἅπαντες τὸν πατέρα αὐτοῦ ὅτι Ἕλλην ὑπῆρχεν:
similarly, τυγχάνοντα is omitted by many in Luke x. 30; compare
also Acts xviii. 26 <hi rend='italic'>fin.</hi>; xix. 8, 34 <hi rend='italic'>init.</hi> The classical μέν
has often been inserted against the best evidence: e.g. Acts
v. 23: xix. 4, 15; 1 Cor. xii. 20; 2 Cor. iv. 12; Heb. vi. 16. On
the other hand a Hebraism may be softened by transcribers, as
in Matt. xxi. 23, where for ἐλθόντι αὐτῷ many copies prefer the
easier ἐλθόντος αὐτοῦ before προσῆλθεν αὐτῷ διδάσκοντι, and in
Matt. xv. 5; Mark vii. 12 (to which perhaps we may add Luke
v. 35), where καί is dropped in some copies to facilitate the sense.
Hence καὶ οἱ ἄνθρωποι may be upheld before οἱ ποιμένες in Luke
ii. 15. This perpetual correction of harsh, ungrammatical, or
Oriental constructions characterizes the printed text of the
Apocalypse and the recent manuscripts on which it is founded
(e.g. τὴν γυναῖκα Ἰεζαβὴλ τὴν λέγουσαν ii. 20, for ἡ λέγουσα).
</p>

<p>
(13) Hence too arises the habit of changing ancient dialectic
forms into those in vogue in the transcriber's age. The whole
subject will be more fitly discussed at length hereafter (vol. ii.
c. x.); we will here merely note a few peculiarities of this kind
adopted by some recent critics from the oldest manuscripts,
but which have gradually though not entirely disappeared in
copies of lower date. Thus in recent critical editions Καθαρναούμ,
Μαθθαῖος, τέσσερες, ἔνατος are substituted for Καπερναούμ,
Ματθαῖος, τέσσαρες, ἔννατος of the common text; οὕτως (not οὕτω)
is used even before a consonant; ἤλθαμεν, ἤλθατε, ἦλθαν, γενάμενος
are preferred to ἤλθομεν, ἤλθετε, ἦλθον, γενόμενος: ἐκαθερίσθη, συνζητεῖν,
λήμψομαι to ἐκαθαρίσθη, συζητεῖν, λήψομαι: and ν ἐφελκυστικόν
(as it is called) is appended to the usual third persons of
verbs, even though a consonant follow. On the other hand the
more Attic περιπεπατήκει ought not to be converted into περιεπεπατήκει
in Acts xiv. 8.
</p>

<p>
(14) Trifling variations in spelling, though very proper to be
noted by a faithful collator, are obviously of little consequence.
Such is the choice between καὶ ἐγώ and κἀγώ, ἐάν and ἄν, εὐθέως
and εὐθύς, Μωυσῆς and Μωσῆς, or even between πράττουσι and
πράσσουσι, between εὐδόκησα, εὐκαίρουν and ηὐδόκησα, ηὐκαίρουν.
To this head may be referred the question whether ἀλλά<note place='foot'>The oldest manuscripts seem to elide the final syllable of ἀλλά before nouns,
but not before verbs: e.g. John vi. 32, 39. The common text, therefore, seems
wrong in Rom. i. 21; iv. 20; v. 14; viii. 15; 1 Cor. i. 17; vi. 11; ix. 27; xiv.
34; 1 Pet. ii. 25; Jude 9. Yet to this rule there are many exceptions, e.g. Gal.
iv. 7 ἀλλὰ υἱός is found in nearly all good authorities.</note>, γε, δέ,
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
τε, μετά, παρά &amp;c. should have their final vowel elided or not
when the next word begins with a vowel.
</p>

<p>
(15) A large portion of our various readings arises from the
omission or insertion of such words as cause little appreciable
difference in the sense. To this class belong the pronouns
αὐτοῦ, αὐτῷ, αὐτῶν, αὐτοῖς, the particles οὖν, δέ, τε, and the interchange
of οὐδέ and οὔτε, as also of καί and δέ at the opening of
a sentence.
</p>

<p>
(16) Manuscripts greatly fluctuate in adding and rejecting
the Greek article, and the sense is often seriously influenced
by these variations, though they seem so minute. In Mark ii.
26 ἐπὶ Ἀβιάθαρ ἀρχιερέως <q>in the time that Abiathar was high
priest</q> would be historically incorrect, while ἐπὶ Ἀβιάθαρ τοῦ
ἀρχιερέως <q>in the days of Abiathar the high priest</q> is suitable
enough. The article will often impart vividness and reality
to an expression, where its presence is not indispensable: e.g.
Luke xii. 54 τὴν νεφέλην (if τήν be authentic, as looks probable)
is the peculiar cloud spoken of in 1 Kings xviii. 44 as portending
rain. Bishop Middleton's monograph (<q>Doctrine of
the Greek Article applied to the Criticism and Illustration of
the New Testament</q>), though apparently little known to certain
of our most highly esteemed Biblical scholars, even if its
philological groundwork be thought a little precarious, must
always be regarded as the text-book on this interesting subject,
and is a lasting monument of intellectual acuteness and exact
learning.
</p>

<p>
(17) Not a few various readings may be imputed to the
peculiarities of the style of writing adopted in the oldest manuscripts.
Thus ΠΡΟΣΤΕΤΑΓΜΕΝΟΥΣΚΑΙΡΟΥΣ Acts xvii. 26 may
be divided into two words or three; ΚΑΙΤΑΠΑΝΤΑ ibid. ver. 25,
by a slight change, has degenerated into κατὰ πάντα. The
habitual abridgement of such words as Θεός or Κύριος sometimes
leads to a corruption of the text. Hence possibly comes
the grave variation ΟΣ for <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ΘΣ</hi> 1 Tim. iii. 16, and the singular
reading τῷ καιρῷ δουλεύοντες Rom. xii. 11, where the true word
Κυρίῳ was first shortened into <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ΚΡΩ</hi><note place='foot'>Tischendorf indeed (Nov. Test. 1871), from a suggestion of Granville Penn
in loc., says, <q>ΚΥΡΙΩ omnino scribi solet <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ΚΩ</hi>,</q> and this no doubt is the usual form,
even in manuscripts which have <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>χρω ιηυ</hi>, as well as <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>χω ιυ</hi>, for χριστῷ ἰησοῦ. Yet
the Codex Augiensis (Paul. F) has <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>κρν</hi> in 1 Cor. ix. 1.</note>, and then read as ΚΡΩ,
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
Κ being employed to indicate ΚΑΙ in very early times<note place='foot'>Especially, yet not always, at the end of a line. Και in καιρός is actually
thus written in Cod. Sinaiticus (א), 1 Macc. ix. 7; xv. 33; Matt. xxi. 34;
Rom. iii. 26; Heb. xi. 11; Apoc. xi. 18. So Cod. Sarravianus of the fourth
century in Deut. ix. 20, Cod. Rossanensis of the sixth (but only twice in the
text), the Zurich Psalter of the seventh century is Ps. xcvii. 11; cvi. 3; cxvi. 5,
and the Bodleian Genesis (ch. vi. 13) of about a century later. Similarly, καινήν
is written κνην in Cod. B. 2 John 5.</note>. Or
a large initial letter, which the scribe usually reserved for a
subsequent review, may have been altogether neglected: whence
we have τι for Οτι before στενή Matt. vii. 14. Or overscores, placed
over a letter (especially at the end of a line and word) to
denote ν, may have been lost sight of; e.g. λίθον μέγα Matt.
xxvii. 60 in several copies, for ΜΕΓΑ [with a line over the final Α]. The use of the symbol
[symbol composed of Pi and Rho together], which in the Herculanean rolls and now and then in Codex
Sinaiticus stands for προ and προς indifferently, may have produced
that remarkable confusion of the two prepositions when
compounded with verbs which we notice in Matt. xxvi. 39;
Mark xiv. 35; Acts xii. 6; xvii. 5, 26; xx. 5, 13; xxii. 25. It
will be seen hereafter that as the earliest manuscripts have
few marks of punctuation, breathing or accent, these points
(often far from indifferent) must be left in a great measure to
an editor's taste and judgement.
</p>

<p>
(18) Slips of the pen, whereby words are manifestly lost or
repeated, mis-spelt or half-finished, though of no interest to
the critic, must yet be noted by a faithful collator, as they will
occasionally throw light on the history of some particular copy
in connexion with others, and always indicate the degree of care
or skill employed by the scribe, and consequently the weight
due to his general testimony.
</p>

<p>
The great mass of various readings we have hitherto attempted
to classify (to our <emph>first</emph> and <emph>second</emph> heads we will recur
presently) are manifestly due to mere inadvertence or human
frailty, and certainly cannot be imputed to any deliberate intention
of transcribers to tamper with the text of Scripture.
We must give a different account of a few passages (we are
glad they are only a few) which yet remain to be noticed.
</p>

<p>
(19) The copyist may be tempted to forsake his proper
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
function for that of a reviser, or critical corrector. He may
simply omit what he does not understand (e.g. δευτεροπρώτῳ
Luke vi. 1; τὸ μαρτύριον 1 Tim. ii. 6), or may attempt to get
over a difficulty by inversions and other changes. Thus the
μυστήριον spoken of by St. Paul 1 Cor. xv. 51, which rightly
stands in the received text πάντες μὲν οὐ κοιμηθησόμεθα, πάντες
δὲ ἀλλαγησόμεθα, was easily varied into πάντες κοιμηθησόμεθα,
οὐ π. δὲ ἀλ., as if in mere perplexity. From this source must
arise the omission in a few manuscripts of υἱοῦ Βαραχίου in
Matt. xxiii. 35; of Ἱερεμίου in Matt. xxvii. 9; the insertion
of ἄλλου ἐκ before θυσιαστηρίου in Apoc. xvi. 7; perhaps the
substitution of τοῖς προφήταις for Ἡσαΐᾳ τῷ προφήτῃ in Mark i. 2,
of οὔπω ἀναβαίνω for οὐκ ἀναβαίνω in John vii. 8, and certainly
of τρίτη for ἕκτε in John xix. 14. The variations between Γεργεσηνῶν
and Γαδαρηνῶν Matt. viii. 28, and between Βηθαβαρᾶ
and Βηθανίᾳ John i. 28, have been attributed, we hope and
believe unjustly, to the misplaced conjectures of Origen.
</p>

<p>
Some would impute such readings as ἔχωμεν for ἔχομεν Rom.
v. 1; φορέσμεν for φορέσομεν 1 Cor. xv. 49, to a desire on the
part of copyists to <emph>improve</emph> an assertion into an ethical exhortation,
especially in the Apostolical Epistles; but it is at
once safer and more simple to regard them with Bishop Chr.
Wordsworth (N. T. 1 Cor. xv. 49) as instances of <emph>itacism</emph>: see
class <ref target='Chapter_I_Section_10_Class_7'>(7)</ref> above.
</p>

<p>
(20) Finally, whatever conclusion we arrive at respecting the
true reading in the following passages, the discrepancy could
hardly have arisen except from doctrinal preconceptions. Matt.
xix. 17 Τί με λέγεις ἀγαθόν? οὐδεὶς ἀγαθὸς εἰ μὴ εἶς, ὁ Θεός; or Τί
με ἐρωτᾷς περὶ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ? εἶς ἐστὶν ὁ ἀγαθός: John i. 18 ὁ
μονογενὴς υἱός or μονογενὴς Θεός: Acts xvi. 7 τὸ πνεῦμα with
or without the addition of Ἰησοῦ: Acts xx. 28 τὴν ἐκκλησίαν
τοῦ Θεοῦ or τὴν ἐκκλησίαν τοῦ Κυρίου: perhaps also Jude ver. 4
δεσπότην with or without Θεόν. I do not mention Mark xiii. 32
οὐδὲ ὁ υἱός, as there is hardly any authority for its rejection now
extant; nor Luke ii. 22, where τοῦ καθαρισμοῦ αὐτῆς of the
Complutensian Polyglott and most of our common editions is
supported by almost no evidence whatever.
</p>

<p>
11. It is very possible that some scattered readings cannot
be reduced to any of the above-named classes, but enough has
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
been said to afford the student a general notion of the nature
and extent of the subject<note place='foot'>My departed friend, Dr. Tregelles, to whose persevering labours in sacred
criticism I am anxious, once for all, to express my deepest obligations, ranged
various readings under three general heads:&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>substitutions</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>additions</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>omissions</hi>.
Mr. C. E. Hammond, in his scholarlike little work, <q>Outlines of Textual Criticism
applied to the N. T., 1876, 2nd edition,</q> divides their possible sources into
Unconscious or unintentional errors, (1) of <emph>sight</emph>; (2) of <emph>hearing</emph>; (3) of <emph>memory</emph>:
and those that are Conscious or intentional, viz. (4) incorporation of marginal
glosses; (5) corrections of harsh or unusual forms of words, or expressions;
(6) alterations in the text to produce supposed harmony with another passage,
to complete a quotation, or to clear up a presumed difficulty; (7) Liturgical
insertions. While he enumerates (8) alterations for dogmatic reasons, he adds
that <q>there appears to be no strong ground for the suggestion</q> that any such
exist (Hammond, p. 17). Professor Roberts (<q>Words of the New Testament</q>
by Drs. Milligan and Roberts, 1873) comprehends several of the foregoing
divisions under one head: <q>Again and again has a word or phrase been slipped
in by the transcriber which had no existence in his copy, but which was due to
the working of his own mind on the subject before him.</q> His examples are
ἔρχεται inserted in Matt. xxv. 6; ἰδοῦσα in Luke i. 29; ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν in Rom. viii. 26
(Part 1. Chap. 1. pp. 5, 6).</note>. It may be reasonably thought
that a portion of these variations, and those among the most
considerable, had their origin in a cause which must have
operated at least as much in ancient as in modern times, the
changes gradually introduced after publication by the authors
themselves into the various copies yet within their reach. Such
revised copies would circulate independently of those issued
previously, and now beyond the writer's control; and thus becoming
the parents of a new family of copies, would originate
and keep up diversities from the first edition, without any fault
on the part of transcribers<note place='foot'>This source of variations, though not easily discriminated from others, must
have suggested itself to many minds, and is well touched upon by the late
Isaac Taylor in his <q>History of the Transmission of Antient Books to modern
times,</q> 1827, p. 24. So Dr. Hort, when perplexed by some of the textual
problems which he fails to solve, throws out as an hypothesis not in itself
without plausibility, the notion of <q>a first and a second edition of the Gospels,
both conceivably apostolic</q> (Gr. Test. Introduction, p. 177).</note>. It is thus perhaps we may best
account for the omission or insertion of whole paragraphs or
verses in manuscripts of a certain class [see above <ref target='Chapter_I_Section_10_Class_1'>(1)</ref>, <ref target='Chapter_I_Section_10_Class_2'>(2)</ref>, <ref target='Chapter_I_Section_10_Class_3'>(3)</ref>];
or, in cases where the work was in much request, for those
minute touches and trifling improvements in words, in construction,
in tone, or in the mere colouring of the style [<ref target='Chapter_I_Section_10_Class_5'>(5)</ref>, <ref target='Chapter_I_Section_10_Class_11'>(11)</ref>,
<ref target='Chapter_I_Section_10_Class_12'>(12)</ref>], which few authors can help attempting, when engaged on
revising their favourite compositions. Even in the Old Testament,
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
the song of David in 2 Sam. xxii is evidently an early
draft of the more finished composition, Ps. xviii. Traces of the
writer's <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>curae secundae</foreign> may possibly be found in John v. 3, 4;
vii. 53-viii. 11; xiii. 26; Acts xx. 4, 15; xxiv. 6-8. To this
list some critics feel disposed to add portions of Luke xxi-xxiv.
</p>

<p>
12. The fullest critical edition of the Greek Testament hitherto
published contains but a comparatively small portion of the
whole mass of variations already known; as a rule, the editors
neglect, and rightly neglect, mere errors of transcription. Such
things must be recorded for several reasons, but neither they,
nor real various readings that are slenderly supported, can
produce any effect in the task of amending or restoring the
sacred text. Those who wish to see for themselves how far the
common printed editions of what is called the <q>textus receptus</q>
differ from the judgement of the most recent critics, may refer
if they please to the small Greek Testament published in the
series of <q>Cambridge Greek and Latin Texts<note place='foot'><q>Novum Testamentum Textûs Stephanici <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1550 ... curante F. H. A.
Scrivener.</q> Cantabr. 1877 (Editio Major, 1887).</note>,</q> which exhibits
in a thicker type all words and clauses wherein Robert Stephen's
edition of 1550 (which is taken as a convenient standard) differs
from the other chief modifications of the <hi rend='italic'>textus receptus</hi> (viz.
Beza's 1565 and Elzevir's 1624), as also from the revised texts
of Lachmann 1842-50, of Tischendorf 1865-72, of Tregelles
1857-72, of the Revisers of the English New Testament (1881),
and of Westcott and Hort (1881). The student will thus be
enabled to estimate for himself the limits within which the text
of the Greek Testament may be regarded as still open to
discussion, and to take a general survey of the questions on
which the theologian is bound to form an intelligent opinion.
</p>

<p>
13. The work that lies before us naturally divides itself into
three distinct parts.
</p>

<p>
I. A description of the sources from which various readings
are derived (or of their <hi rend='smallcaps'>external evidence</hi>), comprising:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Manuscripts of the Greek New Testament or of portions
thereof.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Ancient versions of the New Testament in various
languages.
</p>

<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Citations from the Greek Testament or its versions
made by early ecclesiastical writers, especially by
the Fathers of the Christian Church.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) Early printed or later critical editions of the Greek
Testament.
</p>

<p>
II. A discussion of the principles on which external evidence
should be applied to the recension of the sacred volume,
embracing
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The laws of <hi rend='smallcaps'>internal evidence</hi>, and the limits of
their legitimate use.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The history of the text and of the principal schemes
which have been proposed for restoring it to its
primitive state, including recent views of Comparative
Criticism.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Considerations derived from the peculiar character
and grammatical form of the dialect of the Greek
Testament.
</p>

<p>
III. The application of the foregoing materials and principles
to the investigation of the true reading in the chief passages
of the New Testament, on which authorities are at variance.
</p>

<p>
In this edition, as has already been explained in the preface,
it has been found necessary to divide the treatise into two
volumes, which will contain respectively&mdash;
</p>

<p>
I. First Volume:&mdash;Ancient Manuscripts.
</p>

<p>
II. Second Volume:&mdash;Versions, Citations, Editions, Principles,
and Selected Passages.
</p>

<p>
It will be found desirable to read the following pages in
the order wherein they stand, although the chief part of
Chapters VII-XIV of the first volume and some portions elsewhere
(indicated by being printed like them in smaller type)
are obviously intended chiefly for reference, or for less searching
examination.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. General Character Of The Greek Manuscripts Of
The New Testament.</head>

<p>
As the extant Greek manuscripts of the New Testament
supply both the most copious and the purest sources of
Textual Criticism, we propose to present to the reader some
account of their peculiarities in regard to material, form, style of
writing, date and contents, before we enter into details respecting
individual copies, under the several subdivisions to which it is
usual to refer them.
</p>

<p>
1. The subject of the present section has been systematically
discussed in the <q>Palaeographia Graeca</q> (Paris, 1708, folio) of
Bernard de Montfaucon [1655-1741<note place='foot'>In this manner we propose to indicate the dates of the birth and death of
the person whose name immediately precedes.</note>], the most illustrious
member of the learned Society of the Benedictines of St. Maur.
This truly great work, although its materials are rather too
exclusively drawn from manuscripts deposited in French libraries,
and its many illustrative facsimiles are somewhat rudely engraved,
still maintains a high authority on all points relating to
Greek manuscripts, even after more recent discoveries, especially
among the papyri of Egypt and Herculaneum, have necessarily
modified not a few of its statements. The four splendid volumes
of M. J. B. Silvestre's <q>Paléographie Universelle</q> (Paris, 1839-41,
&amp;c. folio) afford us no less than 300 plates of the Greek
writing of various ages, sumptuously executed; though the
accompanying letter-press descriptions, by F. and A. Champollion
Fils, seem in this branch of the subject a little disappointing;
nor are the valuable notes appended to his translation of their
work by Sir Frederick Madden (London, 2 vols. 1850, 8vo)
sufficiently numerous or elaborate to supply the Champollions'
defects. Much, however, may also be learnt from the <q>Herculanensium
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
voluminum quae supersunt</q> (Naples, 10 tom. 1793-1850,
fol.); from Mr. Babington's three volumes of papyrus
fragments of Hyperides, respectively published in 1850, 1853
and 1858; and especially from the Prolegomena to Tischendorf's
editions of the Codices Ephraemi (1843), Friderico-Augustanus
(1846), Claromontanus (1852), Sinaiticus (1862), Vaticanus
(1867), and those other like publications (e.g. Monumenta sacra
inedita 1846-1870, and Anecdota sacra et profana 1855) which
have rendered his name perhaps the very highest among scholars
in this department of sacred literature. What I have been able
to add from my own observation, has been gathered from the
study of Biblical manuscripts now in England. To these
sources of information may now be added Professor Wattenbach's
<q>Anleitung zur griechischen Palaeographie</q> second
edition, Leipsic, 1877, Gardthausen's <q>Griechische Palaeographie,</q>
Leipsic, 1879; Dr. C. R. Gregory's <q>Prolegomena</q> to the eighth
edition of Tischendorf, and especially the publication of <q>The
Palaeographical Society Greek Testament,</q> Parts I and II,
Leipsic, 1884, 1891, <q>Facsimiles of Manuscripts and Inscriptions</q>
edited by E. A. Bond and E. M. Thompson, Parts I-XII,
London, 1873-82, and a Manual on <q>Greek and Latin Palaeography</q>
from the hands of Mr. E. Maunde Thompson, of
which the proof-sheets have been most kindly placed by the
accomplished author at the disposal of the editor of this work,
and have furnished to this chapter many elements of enrichment.
It may be added, that since manuscripts have been
photographed, all other facsimiles have been put in the shade:
and in this edition references as a rule will be given only to
photographed copies.
</p>

<p>
2. The <emph>materials</emph> on which writing has been impressed at
different periods and stages of civilization are the following:&mdash;Leaves,
bark, especially of the lime (<foreign rend='italic'>liber</foreign>), linen, clay and
pottery, wall-spaces, metals, lead, bronze, wood, waxen and
other tablets, papyrus, skins, parchment and vellum, and from
an early date amongst the Chinese, and in the West after the
capture of Samarcand by the Arabs in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 704, paper
manufactured from fibrous substances<note place='foot'><q>Greek and Latin Palaeography,</q> Chaps. II, III.</note>. The most ancient
manuscripts of the New Testament now existing are composed
of vellum or parchment (<foreign rend='italic'>membrana</foreign>), the term vellum being
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
strictly applied to the delicate skins of very young calves, and
parchment to the integuments of sheep and goats, though the
terms are as a rule employed convertibly. The word parchment
seems to be a corruption of <foreign rend='italic'>charta pergamena</foreign>, a name
first given to skins prepared by some improved process for
Eumenes, king of Pergamum, about <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 150. In judging of the
date of a manuscript on skins, attention must be paid to the
quality of the material, the oldest being almost invariably
written on the thinnest and whitest vellum that could be
procured; while manuscripts of later ages, being usually
composed of parchment, are thick, discoloured, and coarsely
grained. Thus the Codex Sinaiticus of the fourth century is
made of the finest skins of antelopes, the leaves being so large,
that a single animal would furnish only two (Tischendorf, Cod.
Frid.-August. Prolegomena, §. 1). Its contemporary, the far-famed
Codex Vaticanus, challenges universal admiration for the
beauty of its vellum: every visitor at the British Museum can
observe the excellence of that of the Codex Alexandrinus of the
fifth century: that of the Codex Claromontanus of the sixth
century is even more remarkable: the material of those purple-dyed
fragments of the Gospels which Tischendorf denominates
N, also of the sixth century, is so subtle and delicate, that some
persons have mistaken the leaves preserved in England (Brit.
Mus. Cotton, Titus C xv) for Egyptian papyrus. Paper made of
cotton<note place='foot'><q>Recent investigations have thrown doubts on the accuracy of this view; and
a careful analysis of many samples has proved that, although cotton was
occasionally used, no paper that has been examined is entirely made of that
substance, hemp or flax being the more usual material.</q> Maunde Thompson,
p. 44.</note> (<foreign rend='italic'>charta bombycina</foreign>, called also <foreign rend='italic'>charta Damascena</foreign> from
its place of manufacture) may have been fabricated in the
ninth<note place='foot'>Tischendorf (Notitia Codicis Sinaitici, p. 54) carried to St. Petersburg
a fragment of a Lectionary which cannot well be assigned to a later date than
the ninth century, among whose parchment leaves are inserted two of cotton
paper, manifestly written on by the original scribe.</note> or tenth century, and linen paper (<foreign rend='italic'>charta</foreign> proper) as
early as 1242 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>; but they were seldom used for Biblical
manuscripts sooner than the thirteenth, and had not entirely
displaced parchment at the era of the invention of printing,
about <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1450. Lost portions of parchment or vellum
manuscripts are often supplied in paper by some later hand;
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
but the Codex Leicestrensis of the fourteenth century is
composed of a mixture of inferior vellum and worse paper,
regularly arranged in the proportion of two parchment to three
paper leaves, recurring alternately throughout the whole volume.
Like it, in the mixture of parchment and paper, are codd. 233
and Brit. Mus. Harl. 3,161&mdash;the latter however not being a
New Testament MS.
</p>

<p>
3. Although parchment was in occasional, if not familiar, use
at the period when the New Testament was written (τὰ βιβλία,
μάλιστα τὰς μεμβράνας 2 Tim. iv. 13), yet the more perishable
papyrus of Egypt was chiefly employed for ordinary purposes.
This vegetable production had been used for literary purposes
from the earliest times. <q>Papyrus rolls are represented on the
sculptured walls of Egyptian temples.</q> The oldest roll now
extant is the papyrus Prisse at Paris, which dates from 2500 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>,
or even earlier, unless those which have been lately discovered
by Mr. Flinders Petrie reach as far, or even farther, back<note place='foot'><q>Ten Years Digging in Egypt,</q> pp. 120, &amp;c.</note>. The
ordinary name applied in Greek to this material was χάρτης
(2 John 12), though Herodotus terms it βύβλος (ii. 100, v. 58),
and in Latin <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>charta</foreign> (2 Esdr. xv. 2; Tobit vii. 14&mdash;Old Latin
Version). Papyrus was in those days esteemed more highly than
skins: for Herodotus expressly states that the Ionians had been
compelled to have recourse to goats and sheep for lack of byblus
or papyrus; and Eumenes was driven to prepare parchment
because the Alexandrians were too jealous to supply him with
the material which he coveted<note place='foot'><q>Greek and Latin Palaeography,</q> p. 35; Pliny, Nat. Hist. xiii. 11.</note>. Indeed, papyrus was used far
beyond the borders of Egypt, and was plentiful in Rome under
the Empire, being in fact the common material among the
Romans during that period: and as many of the manuscripts
of the New Testament must have been written upon so perishable
a substance in the earliest centuries since the Christian era, this
probably is one of the reasons why we possess no considerable
copies from before the second quarter of the fourth century.
Only a few fragments of the New Testament on papyrus remain.
We find a minute, if not a very clear description of the mode of
preparing the papyrus for the scribe in the works of the elder
Pliny (Hist. Nat. xiii. 11, 12). The plant grew in Egypt, also
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
in Syria, and on the Niger and the Euphrates. Mainly under
Christian influence it was supplanted by parchment and vellum,
which had superior claims to durability, and its manufacture
ceased altogether on the conquest of Egypt by the Mohammedans
(<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 638).
</p>

<p>
4. Parchment is said to have been introduced at Rome not
long after its employment by Attalus. Nevertheless, if it had
been in constant and ordinary use under the first Emperors,
we can hardly suppose that specimens of secular writing would
have failed to come down to us. Its increased growth and
prevalence about synchronize with the rise of Constantinopolitan
influence. It may readily be imagined that vellum (especially
that fine sort by praiseworthy custom required for copies of
Holy Scripture) could never have been otherwise than scarce
and dear. Hence arose, at a very early period of the Christian
era, the practice and almost the necessity of erasing ancient
writing from skins, in order to make room for works in which
the living generation felt more interest, especially when clean
vellum failed the scribe towards the end of his task. This
process of destruction, however, was seldom so fully carried
out, but that the strokes of the elder hand might still be traced,
more or less completely, under the more modern writing. Such
manuscripts are called <foreign rend='italic'>codices rescripti</foreign> or palimpsests (παλίμψηστα<note place='foot'><q>Nam, quod in palimpsesto, laudo equidem parcimoniam,</q> Cicero, Ad
Diversos, vii. 18, though of a waxen tablet. Maunde Thompson, p. 75.</note>),
and several of the most precious monuments of sacred
learning are of this description. The Codex Ephraemi at Paris
contains large fragments both of the Old and New Testament
under the later Greek works of St. Ephraem the Syrian: and
the Codex Nitriensis, more recently disinterred from a monastery
in the Egyptian desert and brought to the British Museum,
comprises a portion of St. Luke's Gospel, nearly obliterated,
and covered over by a Syriac treatise of Severus of Antioch
against Grammaticus, comparatively of no value whatever.
It will be easily believed that the collating or transcribing of
palimpsests has cost much toil and patience to those whose
loving zeal has led them to the attempt: and after all the
true readings will be sometimes (not often) rather uncertain,
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
even though chemical mixtures (of which <q>the most harmless is
probably hydrosulphuret of ammonia</q>) have recently been applied
with much success to restore the faded lines and letters of these
venerable records.
</p>

<p>
5. We need say but little of a practice which St. Jerome<note place='foot'><q>Habeant qui volunt veteres libros, vel in membranis purpureis auro
argentoque descriptos.</q> Praef. in Job. <q>Inficiuntur membranae colore purpureo,
aurum liquescit in litteras.</q> Epist. ad Eustochium.</note>
and others speak of as prevalent towards the end of the fourth
century, that of dyeing the vellum purple, and of stamping
rather than writing the letters in silver and gold. The Cotton
fragment of the Gospels, mentioned above (p. <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>), is one of the
few remaining copies of this kind, as are the newly discovered
Codex Rossanensis and the Codex Beratinus, and it is not unlikely
that the great Dublin palimpsest of St. Matthew owes its present
wretched discoloration to some such dye. But, as Davidson
sensibly observes, <q>the value of a manuscript does not depend
on such things</q> (Biblical Criticism, vol. ii. p. 264). We care for
them only as they serve to indicate the reverence paid to the
Scriptures by men of old. The style, however, of the pictures,
illustrations, arabesques and initial ornaments that prevail in
later copies from the eighth century downwards, whose colours
and gilding are sometimes as fresh and bright as if laid on but
yesterday<note place='foot'>Miniatures are found even as early as in the Cod. Rossanensis (Σ) at the
beginning of the sixth century.</note>, will not only interest the student by tending to
throw light on mediaeval art and habits and modes of thought,
but will often fix the date of the books which contain them
with a precision otherwise quite beyond our reach.
</p>

<p>
6. The ink found upon ancient manuscripts is of various
colours<note place='foot'>This paragraph which has been rewritten, has been abridged from Mr. Maunde
Thompson's <q>Greek and Latin Palaeography,</q> pp. 50-52, to which readers are
referred for verification and amplification.</note>. Black ink, the ordinary writing fluid of centuries
(μέλαν, <foreign rend='italic'>atramentum</foreign>, &amp;c.) differs in tint at various periods and
in different countries. In early MSS. it is either pure black
or slightly brown; in the Middle Ages it varies a good deal
according to age and locality. In Italy and Southern Europe
it is generally blacker than in the North, in France and Flanders
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
it is generally darker than in England; a Spanish MS. of
the fourteenth or fifteenth century may usually be recognized
by the peculiar blackness of the ink. Deterioration is observable
in the course of time. The ink of the fifteenth century particularly
is often of a faded grey colour. Inks of green, yellow,
and other colours, are also found, but generally only for
ornamental purposes. Red, either in the form of a pigment
or fluid ink, is of very ancient and common use, being seen even
in early Egyptian papyri. Gold was also used as a writing
fluid at a very early period. Purple-stained vellum MSS. were
usually written upon in gold or silver letters, and ordinary
white vellum MSS. were also written in gold, particularly in
the ninth and tenth centuries, in the reigns of the Carlovingian
kings. Gold writing <emph>as a practice</emph> died out in the thirteenth
century: and writing in silver appears to have ceased contemporaneously
with the disuse of stained vellum. The ancients
used the liquid of cuttle-fish. Pliny mentions soot and gum
as the ingredients of writing-ink. Other later authors add
gall-apples: metallic infusions at an early period, and vitriol
in the Middle Ages were also employed.
</p>

<p>
7. While papyrus remained in common use, the chief instrument
employed was a reed (κάλαμος 3 John ver. 13, <foreign rend='italic'>canna</foreign>), such as
are common in the East at present: a few existing manuscripts
(e.g. the Codd. Leicestrensis and Lambeth 1350) appear to have
been thus written. Yet the firmness and regularity of the
strokes, which often remain impressed on the vellum or paper
after the ink has utterly gone, seem to prove that in the
great majority of cases the <foreign rend='italic'>stilus</foreign> made of iron, bronze, or other
metal, or ivory or bone, sharp at one end to scratch the letters,
and furnished with a knob or flat head at the other for purposes
of erasure, had not gone wholly out of use. We must add to
our list of Writing materials a bodkin or needle (<foreign rend='italic'>acus</foreign>), by means
of which and a ruler the blank leaf was carefully divided,
generally on the outer side of the skin, into columns and lines,
whose regularity much enhances the beauty of our best copies.
The vestiges of such points and marks may yet be seen deeply
indented on the surface of nearly all manuscripts, those on one
side of each leaf being usually sufficiently visible to guide the
scribe when he came to write on the reverse. The quill pen
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
probably came into use with vellum, for which it is obviously
suited. The first notices of it occur in a story respecting
Theodoric the Ostrogoth, and in a passage of Isidore's <q>Origines</q><note place='foot'><q>Greek and Latin Palaeography,</q> p. 49.</note>
(vi. 13).
</p>

<p>
8. Little need be said respecting the <emph>form</emph> of manuscripts,
which in this particular (<foreign rend='italic'>codices</foreign>) much resemble printed books.
A few are in large folio; the greater part in small folio or
quarto, the prevailing shape being a quarto (<foreign rend='italic'>quaternio</foreign> or quire)
whose height but little exceeds its breadth; some are in octavo,
a not inconsiderable number smaller still: and quires of three
sheets or six leaves, and five sheets or ten leaves (Cod. Vaticanus),
are to be met with. In some copies the sheets have marks
in the lower margin of their first or last pages, like the <emph>signatures</emph>
of a modern volume, the folio at intervals of two, the quarto at
intervals of four leaves, as in the Codex Bezae of the Gospels
and Acts (D), and the Codex Augiensis of St. Paul's Epistles (F).
Not to speak at present of those manuscripts which have a
Latin translation in a column parallel to the Greek, as the
Codex Bezae, the Codex Laudianus of the Acts, and the Codices
Claromontanus and Augiensis of St. Paul, many copies of every
age have two Greek columns on each page; of these the Codex
Alexandrinus is the oldest: the Codex Vaticanus has three
columns on a page, the Codex Sinaiticus four. The unique
arrangement<note place='foot'>Besides the Cod. Sinaiticus, the beautiful Psalter purchased by the National
Library from the Didot sale at Paris has four columns (Mr. J. Rendel Harris),
and besides the Cod. Vaticanus, the Vatican Dio Cassius, the Milan fragment of
Genesis, two copies of the Samaritan Pentateuch at Nablous described by
Tischendorf (Cod. Frid.-Aug. Proleg. § 11), the last part of Cod. Monacensis 208
(Evan, 429), and two Hebrew MSS. Cod. Mon. Heb. 422, and Cod. Reg. Heb. 17,
are arranged in <emph>three</emph> columns. Tischendorf has more recently discovered a similar
arrangement in two palimpsest leaves of Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus from which
he gives extracts (Not. Cod. Sinait. p. 49); in a Latin fragment of the Pentateuch,
the same as the Ashburnham manuscript below, seen by him at Lyons in 1843; in
a Greek Evangelistarium of the eighth century, and a Patristic manuscript at
Patmos of the ninth (ibid. p. 10); so that the argument drawn from the <emph>triple</emph>
columns must not be pressed too far. He adds also a Turin copy of the Minor
Prophets in Greek (Pasinus, Catalogue, 1749), and a Nitrian Syriac codex in the
British Museum <q>quem circa finem quarti saeculi scriptum esse subscriptio
testatur</q> (Monum. sacra inedita, vol. i, Proleg. p. xxxi). To this not slender
list Mr. E. Maunde Thompson enables us to annex B. M. Addit. 24142, a Flemish
Latin Bible of the eleventh century. The late Lord Ashburnham in 1868
printed his Old Latin fragments of Leviticus and Numbers, also in three
columns, with a facsimile page; and the famous Utrecht Psalter, assigned by
some to the sixth century, by others to the ninth or tenth, is written with three
columns on a page.</note> of these last two has been urged as an argument
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
for their higher antiquity, as if they were designed to imitate
<emph>rolled</emph> books, whose several skins or leaves were fastened
together lengthwise, so that their contents always appeared in
parallel columns; they were kept in scrolls which were unrolled
at one end for reading, and when read rolled up at the other.
This fashion prevails in the papyrus fragments yet remaining,
and in the most venerated copies of the Old Testament preserved
in Jewish synagogues.
</p>

<p>
9. We now approach a more important question, the <emph>style</emph>
of writing adopted in manuscripts, and the shapes of the several
letters. These varied widely in different ages, and form the
simplest and surest criteria for approximating to the date of the
documents themselves. Greek characters are properly divided
into <q>majuscules</q> and <q>minuscules,</q> or by a subdivision of the
former, into Capitals, which are generally of a square kind, fitted
for inscriptions on stones like Ε; Uncials, or large letters<note place='foot'><q>Uncialibus, ut vulgo aiunt, literis, onera magis exarata, quam codices,</q>
Hieronymi Praef. in Job. From this passage the term <foreign rend='italic'>uncial</foreign> seems to be derived,
<foreign rend='italic'>uncia</foreign> (an inch) referring to the size of the characters. Yet the conjectural reading
<q><foreign rend='italic'>initialibus</foreign></q> will most approve itself to those who are familiar with the small Latin
writing of the Middle Ages, in which <hi rend='italic'>i</hi> is undotted, and <hi rend='italic'>c</hi> much like <hi rend='italic'>t</hi>.</note>, and a
modification of Capitals, with a free introduction of curves, and
better suited for writing, like Ε; and Cursives, or small letters,
adapted for the running hand. <emph>Uncial</emph> manuscripts were written
in what have frequently been regarded as capital letters, formed
separately, having no connexion with each other, and (in the
earlier specimens) without any space between the words, the
marks of punctuation being few: the <emph>cursive</emph> or running hand
comprising letters more easily and rapidly made, those in the
same word being usually joined together, with a complete
system of punctuation not widely removed from that of printed
books. Speaking generally, and limiting our statement to Greek
manuscripts of the New Testament, Uncial letters or the
Literary or Book-hand prevailed from the fourth to the tenth,
or (in the case of liturgical books) as late as the eleventh
century; Cursive letters were employed as early as the ninth
or tenth century, and continued in use until the invention of
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
printing superseded the humble labours of the scribe. But
cursive writing existed before the Christian era: and it seems
impossible to suppose that so very convenient a form of penmanship
could have fallen into abeyance in ordinary life, although
few documents have come down to us to demonstrate the truth
of this supposition.
</p>

<p>
Besides the broad and palpable distinction between uncial
and cursive letters, persons who have had much experience in the
study of manuscripts are able to distinguish those of either
class from one another in respect of style and character; so that
the period at which each was written can be determined within
certain inconsiderable limits. After the tenth century many
manuscripts bear dates, and such become standards to which
we can refer others resembling them which are undated. But
since the earliest dated Biblical manuscript yet discovered
(Cursive Evan. 481, see below Chap. <ref target='Chapter_VII'>VII</ref>) bears the date
May 7, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 835, we must resort to other means for estimating
the age of more venerable, and therefore more important, copies.
By studying the style and shape of the letters on Greek
inscriptions, Montfaucon was led to conclude that the more
simple, upright, and regular the form of uncial letters; the
less flourish or ornament they exhibit; the nearer their breadth
is equal to their height; so much the more ancient they ought
to be considered. These results have been signally confirmed
by the subsequent discovery of Greek papyri in Egyptian tombs
especially in the third century before the Christian era; and
yet further from numerous fragments of Philodemus, of Epicurus,
and other philosophers, which were buried in the ruins of
Herculaneum in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 79 (<q>Fragmenta Herculanensia,</q> Walter
Scott). The evidence of these papyri, indeed, is even more
weighty than that of inscriptions, inasmuch as workers in stone,
as has been remarked, were often compelled to prefer straight
lines, as better adapted to the hardness of their material,
where writings on papyrus or vellum would naturally flow
into curves.
</p>

<p>
10. While we freely grant that a certain tact, the fruit of
study and minute observation, can alone make us capable of
forming a trustworthy opinion on the age of manuscripts; it is
worth while to point out the <emph>principles</emph> on which a true
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
judgement must be grounded, and to submit to the reader a few
leading facts, which his own research may hereafter enable him
to apply and to extend.
</p>

<p>
The first three plates at the beginning of this volume represent
the Greek alphabet, as found in the seven following monuments:
</p>

<p>
(1) The celebrated Rosetta stone, discovered near that place
during the French occupation of Egypt in 1799, and now in the
British Museum. This most important inscription, which in the
hands of Young and Champollion has proved the key to the
mysteries of Egyptian hieroglyphics, records events of no
intrinsic consequence that occurred <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 196, in the reign of
Ptolemy V Epiphanes. It is written in the three several forms
of hieroglyphics, of the demotic or common characters of the
country, and of Greek Capitals, which last may represent the
<emph>lapidary</emph> style of the second century before our era. The
words are undivided, without breathings, accents, or marks of
punctuation, and the uncial letters (excepting [symbol like capital Roman I] for <hi rend='italic'>zeta</hi>)
approach very nearly to our modern capital type. In shape
they are simple, perhaps a little rude; rather square than
oblong: and as the carver on this hard black stone was obliged
to avoid curve lines whenever he could, the forms of Ε, Ξ and Σ
differ considerably from the specimens we shall produce from
documents described on soft materials. Plate <ref target='Plate_I'>I</ref>. No. (1).
</p>

<p>
(2) The Codex Friderico-Augustanus of the fourth century,
published in lithographed facsimile in 1846, contains on forty-three
leaves fragments of the Septuagint version, chiefly from
1 Chronicles and Jeremiah, with Nehemiah and Esther complete,
in oblong folio, with four columns on each page. The plates are
so carefully executed that the very form of the ancient letters
and the colour of the ink are represented to us by Tischendorf,
who discovered it in the East. In 1859 the same indefatigable
scholar brought to Europe the remainder of this manuscript,
which seems as old as the fourth century, anterior (as he thinks)
to the Codex Vaticanus itself, and published it in 1862, in
facsimile type cast for the purpose, 4 tom., with twenty pages
lithographed or photographed, at the expense of the Emperor
Alexander II of Russia, to whom the original had been presented.
This book, which Tischendorf calls Codex Sinaiticus, contains,
besides much more of the Septuagint, <emph>the whole New Testament</emph>
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
with Barnabas' Epistle and a part of Hermas' Shepherd annexed.
As a kind of <foreign rend='italic'>avant-courier</foreign> to his great work he had previously
put forth a tract entitled <q>Notitia Editionis Codicis Bibliorum
Sinaitici Auspiciis Imperatoris Alexandri II susceptae</q> (Leipsic,
1860). Of this most valuable manuscript a complete account
will be given in the opening of the fourth chapter, under the
appellation of <hi rend='italic'>Aleph</hi> (א), assigned to it by Tischendorf, in the
exercise of his right as its discoverer. Plate <ref target='Plate_I'>I</ref>. No. 2.
</p>

<p>
(3) Codex Alexandrinus of the fifth century (A). Plate <ref target='Plate_I'>I</ref>.
</p>

<p>
(4) Codex Purpureus Cotton.: N of the Gospels, of the sixth century. Plate <ref target='Plate_II'>II</ref>.
</p>

<p>
(5) Codex Nitriensis Rescriptus, R of the Gospels, of the sixth century. Plate <ref target='Plate_II'>II</ref>.
</p>

<p>
(6) Codex Dublinensis Rescriptus, Z of the Gospels, of the sixth century. Plate <ref target='Plate_III'>III</ref>.
</p>

<p>
(7) Evangelistarium Harleian. 5598, <hi rend='italic'>dated</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 995. Plate <ref target='Plate_III'>III</ref>.
</p>

<p>
The leading features of these manuscripts will be described
in the fourth and fifth chapters. At present we wish to
compare them with each other for the purpose of tracing, as
closely as we may, the different styles and fashions of uncial
letters which prevailed from the fourth to the tenth or eleventh
century of the Christian era. The varying appearance of cursive
manuscripts cannot so well be seen by exhibiting their alphabets,
for since each letter is for the most part joined to the others in
the same word, <emph>connected</emph> passages alone will afford us a correct
notion of their character and general features. For the moment
we are considering the uncials only.
</p>

<p>
If the Rosetta stone, by its necessary avoiding of curve lines,
gives only a notion of the manner adopted on stone and not in
common writing, it resembles our earliest uncials at least in
one respect, that the letters, being as broad as they are high,
are all capable of being included within circumscribed squares.
Indeed, yet earlier inscriptions are found almost totally destitute
of curves, even Ο and Θ being represented by simple squares,
with or without a bisecting horizontal line (see <hi rend='italic'>theta</hi>, p. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>)<note place='foot'>The Cotton fragment of the book of Genesis of the fifth century, whose poor
shrivelled remains from the fire of 1731 are still preserved in the British Museum,
while in common with all other <emph>manuscripts</emph> it exhibits the round shapes of Ο
and Θ, substitutes a lozenge [symbol] for the circle in <hi rend='italic'>phi</hi>, after the older fashion ([symbol somewhat like a squared Phi]).
<hi rend='italic'>Phi</hi> often has much the same shape in Codex Bezae; e.g. Matt. xiii. 26, Fol. 42 <hi rend='italic'>b</hi>,
1. 13, and once in Codex Z (Matt. xxi. 26, Plate xlviii).</note>.
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
The Herculanean papyri, however (a specimen of which we
have given in Plate <ref target='Plate_IV'>iv</ref>. No. 10), are much better suited than
inscriptions can be for comparison with our earliest copies of
Scripture<note place='foot'>Our facsimile is borrowed from the Neapolitan volumes, but Plate 57 in the
Paléographie Universelle φιλοδημου περι μουσικη has the advantage of <emph>colours</emph> for
giving a lively idea of the present charred appearance of these papyri.</note>. Nothing can well be conceived more elegant than
these simply-formed graceful little letters (somewhat diminished
in size perhaps by the effects of heat) running across the volume,
thirty-nine lines in a column, without capitals or breaks between
the words. There are scarcely any stops, no breathings, accents,
or marks of any kind; only that &gt;, &lt; or [right-pointing triangle] are now and then
found at the end of a line, to fill up the space, or to join a word
or syllable with what follows. A very few abbreviations occur,
such as [symbol like Pi with Rho] in the first line of our specimen, taken from
Philodemus περὶ κακιῶν (Hercul. Volum. Tom. iii. Col. xx.
ll. 6-15), the very manuscript to which Tischendorf compared
his Cod. Friderico-Augustanus (Proleg. § 11). The papyri,
buried for so many ages from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 79 downwards, may probably
be a century older still, since Philodemus the Epicurean was
the contemporary and almost the friend of Cicero<note place='foot'>Cicero de Finibus, Lib. ii. c. 35. The same person is apparently meant in
Orat. in Pisonem, cc. 28, 29.</note>. Hence
from three to four hundred years must have elapsed betwixt the
date of the Herculanean rolls and that of our earliest Biblical
manuscripts. Yet the fashion of writing changed but little
during the interval, far less in every respect than in the four
centuries which next followed, wherein the plain, firm, upright
and square uncials were giving place to the compressed, oblong,
ornamented, or even sloping forms which predominate from the
seventh or eighth century downwards. While advising the
reader to exercise his skill on facsimiles of <emph>entire passages</emph>,
especially in contrasting the lines from Philodemus (No. <ref target='Plate_IV'>10</ref>) with
those from the oldest uncials of the New Testament (Nos. <ref target='Plate_IV'>11-14</ref>;
<ref target='Plate_VI'>17</ref>; <ref target='Plate_VII'>18</ref>; <ref target='Plate_VIII'>20</ref>; <ref target='Plate_X'>24</ref>); we purpose to examine the several
alphabets (Nos. <ref target='Plate_I'>1-7</ref>) letter by letter, pointing out to the student
those variations in shape which palaeographers have judged the
safest criteria of their relative ages. <hi rend='italic'>Alpha</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>delta</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>theta</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>xi</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pi</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>omega</hi>, are among the best tests for this purpose.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Alpha</hi> is not often found in its present familiar shape, except in
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
inscriptions, where the cross line is sometimes broken into an angle
with the vertex downwards ([Symbol]). Even on the Rosetta stone the left
limb leans against the upper part of the right limb, but does not
form an angle with its extremity, while the cross line, springing not
far from the bottom of the left limb, <emph>ascends</emph> to meet the right about half
way down. Modifications of this form may be seen in the Herculanean
rolls, only that the cross line more nearly approaches the horizontal,
and sometimes is almost entirely so. The Cod. Frid.-August.<note place='foot'>We prefer citing Cod. Frid.-August., because our examples have been
actually taken from its exquisitely lithographed pages; but the facsimile of part
of a page from Luke xxiv represented in Tischendorf's Cod. Sinaiticus, from
which we have borrowed six lines (No. <ref target='Plate_IV'>11 b</ref>), will be seen to resemble exactly
the portion published in 1846.</note> does not
vary much from this form, but the three generating lines are often
somewhat curved. In other books, while the right limb is quite straight,
the left and cross line form a kind of loop or curve, as is very observable
in the Nitrian fragment R, and often in Codd. Alex., Ephraemi, Bezae,
the newly discovered Rossanensis, and in the Vatican more frequently
still, in all which <hi rend='italic'>alpha</hi> often approximates to the shape of our English <hi rend='italic'>a</hi>.
<emph>And this curve may be regarded as a proof of antiquity</emph>; indeed
Tischendorf (Proleg. Cod. Sin. p. xxx, 1863) considers it almost peculiar
to the papyri and the Coptic character. Cod. N (which is more recent
than those named above) makes the two lines on the left form a sharp
angle, as do the Cotton fragment of Genesis (see p. <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, note 1) and Cod.
Claromontanus, Plate <ref target='Plate_XIV'>xiv</ref>. No. 41, only that the lines which contain
the angle in this last are very fine. In later times, as the letters
grew tall and narrow, the modern type of A became more marked,
as in the first letter of Arundel 547 (No. <ref target='Plate_VI'>16</ref>), of about the tenth
century, though the form and thickness seen in the Cod. Claromontanus
continued much in vogue to the last. Yet <hi rend='italic'>alpha</hi> even in
Cod. Claromontanus and Cotton Genesis occasionally passes from the
angle into the loop, though not so often as in Cod. A and its companions.
Cod. Borgianus (T), early in the fifth century, exaggerated
this loop into a large ellipse, if Giorgi's facsimile may be trusted. In
Cod. Laudianus E of the Acts and Cureton's palimpsest Homer too
the loop is very decided, the Greek and Latin <hi rend='italic'>a</hi> in Laud. (No. <ref target='Plate_X'>25</ref>)
being alike. Mark also its form in the papyrus scrawl No. <ref target='Plate_IV'>9</ref> (from
one of the orations of Hyperides edited by Mr. Babington), which <emph>may</emph>
be as old as the Rosetta stone. The angular shape adopted in Cod. Z
(Nos. <ref target='Plate_III'>6</ref>, <ref target='Plate_VII'>18</ref>) is unsightly enough, and (I believe) unique.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Beta</hi> varies less than <hi rend='italic'>Alpha</hi>. Originally it consisted of a tall
perpendicular line, on the right side of which four straight lines are
so placed as to form two triangles, whereof the vertical line comprises
the bases, while a small portion of that vertical line entirely separates
the triangles ([Symbol]). This ungraceful figure was modified very early,
even in inscriptions. On the Rosetta stone (No. <ref target='Plate_I'>1</ref>) the triangles are
rounded off into semicircles, and the lower end of the vertical curved.
Yet the shape in manuscripts is not quite so elegant. The lower
curve is usually the larger, and the curves rarely touch each other.
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
Such are Codd. ANRZ, Rossanensis (sometimes), and the Cotton
Genesis. In the Herculanean rolls the letter comes near the common
cursive β; in some others (as Cod. Rossanensis at times) its shape is
quite like the modern Β. When oblong letters became common, the
top (e.g. in Cod. Bezae) and bottom extremities of the curve ran into
straight lines, by way of return into the primitive shape (see No. <ref target='Plate_XIII'>36</ref>,
<hi rend='italic'>dated</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 980). In the very early papyrus fragment of Hyperides
it looks like the English R standing on a base (No. <ref target='Plate_IV'>9</ref>, l. 4). But
this specimen rather belongs to the semi-cursive hand of common life,
than to that of books.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Gamma</hi> in its simplest form consists of two lines of equal thickness,
the shorter so placed upon the longer, which is vertical, as to
make one right angle with it on the right side. Thus we find it in
the Rosetta stone, the papyrus of Hyperides, the Herculanean rolls,
and very often in Cod. A. The next step was to make the horizontal
line very thin, and to strengthen its extremity by a point, or knob,
as in Codd. Ephraemi (No. <ref target='Plate_X'>24</ref>), RZ: or the point was thus strengthened
without thinning the line, e.g. Codd. Vatican., Rossanensis, N and
most later copies, such as Harl. 5598 (No. <ref target='Plate_III'>7</ref>) or its contemporary
Parham 18 (No. <ref target='Plate_XIII'>36</ref>). In Cod. Bezae (No. <ref target='Plate_XIV'>42</ref>) <hi rend='italic'>gamma</hi> much resembles
the Latin r.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Delta</hi> should be closely scrutinized. Its most ancient shape is an
equilateral triangle, the sides being all of the same thickness ([symbol]).
Cod. Claromontanus, though of the sixth century, is in this instance
as simple as any: the Herculanean rolls, Codd. Vatican., Sinait., and
the very old copy of the Pentateuch at Paris (Colbert) or <q>Cod. Sarravianus</q>
and Leyden, much resemble it, only that sometimes the
Herculanean sides are slightly curved, and the right descending stroke
of Cod. Vatican, is thickened. In Cod. A begins a tendency to prolong
the base on one or both sides, and to strengthen one or both ends
by points. We see a little more of this in Cod. Rossanensis and in
the palimpsest Homer of the fifth century, published by Cureton. The
habit increases and gradually becomes confirmed in Codd. Ephraemi
(No. <ref target='Plate_X'>24</ref>), the Vatican Dio Cassius of the fifth or sixth century, in
Cod. R, and particularly in N and E of the Acts (Nos. <ref target='Plate_II'>4</ref>, <ref target='Plate_V'>14</ref>, <ref target='Plate_X'>25</ref>).
In the oblong later uncials it becomes quite elaborate, e.g. Cod. B
of the Apocalypse, or Nos. <ref target='Plate_III'>7</ref>, <ref target='Plate_IX'>21</ref>, <ref target='Plate_XIII'>36</ref>. On the Rosetta stone and in
the Cod. Bezae the right side is produced beyond the triangle, and
is produced and slightly curved in Hyperides, curved and strongly
pointed in Cod. Z.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Epsilon</hi> has its angular form on the Rosetta marble and other inscriptions
in stone; in the oldest manuscripts it consists as an uncial of a
semicircle, from whose centre to the right of it a horizontal radius
is drawn to the concave circumference. Thus it appears in the Herculanean
rolls (only that here the radius is usually broken off before it
meets the circle), in Codd. Frid-August., Vatican., the two Paris
Pentateuchs (Colbert-Leyden fifth century, Coislin. sixth) and the
Cotton Genesis. In Cod. Alex. a slight trace is found of the more
recent practice of strengthening each of the three extremities with
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
knobs, but only the radius at times in Cod. Rossanensis. The custom
increases in Codd. Ephraemi, Bezae, and still more in Codd. NRZ,
wherein the curve becomes greater than a semicircle. In Hyperides
(and in a slighter degree in Cod. Claromon. No. <ref target='Plate_XIV'>41</ref>) the shape almost
resembles the Latin <hi rend='italic'>e</hi>. The form of this and the other round letters
was afterwards much affected in the narrow oblong uncials: see Nos,
<ref target='Plate_III'>7</ref>, <ref target='Plate_VI'>16</ref>, <ref target='Plate_XIII'>36</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeta</hi> on the Rosetta stone maintains its old form ([Symbol rather like a Roman capital I]), which is
indeed but the next letter reversed. In manuscripts it receives its
usual modern shape (Z), the ends being pointed decidedly, slightly,
or not at all, much after the manner described for <hi rend='italic'>epsilon</hi>. In old
copies the lower horizontal line is a trifle curved (Cod. R, No. <ref target='Plate_II'>5</ref>), or
even both the extreme lines (Cod. Z, No. <ref target='Plate_III'>6</ref>, and Cod. Augiensis
of St. Paul). In such late books as Parham 18 (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 980, facsim.
No. <ref target='Plate_XIII'>36</ref>) <hi rend='italic'>Zeta</hi> is so large as to run far below the line, ending in a kind
of tail.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Eta</hi> does not depart from its normal shape (Η) except that in
Cod. Ephraemi (No. <ref target='Plate_X'>24</ref>) and some narrow and late uncials (e.g. Nos.
<ref target='Plate_III'>7</ref>, <ref target='Plate_XIII'>36</ref>) the cross line is often more than half way up the letter. In
a few later uncials the cross line passes <hi rend='italic'>outside</hi> the two perpendiculars,
as in the Cod. Augiensis, twenty-six times on the photographed page of
Scrivener's edition.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Theta</hi> deserves close attention. In some early inscriptions it is
found as a square, bisected horizontally ([Symbol]). On the Rosetta stone
and most others (but only in such monuments) it is a circle, with a
strong central <emph>point</emph>. On the Herculanean rolls the central point is
spread into a short horizontal line, yet not reaching the circumference
(No. <ref target='Plate_IV'>10</ref>, l. 8). Thence in our uncials from the fourth to the sixth
century the line becomes a horizontal diameter to a true circle (Codd.
Vatican., Sinait., Codd. ANRZ, Ephraemi, Claromont., Rossanensis,
and Cureton's Homer). In the seventh century the diameter began
to pass out of the circle on both sides: thence the circle came to be
compressed into an ellipse (sometimes very narrow), and the ends of
the minor axis to be ornamented with knobs, as in Cod. B of the
Apocalypse (eighth century), Cod. Augiensis (ninth century), LX of
the Gospels, after the manner of the tenth century (Nos. <ref target='Plate_III'>7</ref>, <ref target='Plate_VI'>16</ref>, <ref target='Plate_IX'>21</ref>,
<ref target='Plate_XIII'>36</ref>, <ref target='Plate_XIII'>38</ref>).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Iota</hi> would need no remark but for the custom of placing over it
an <hi rend='italic'>upsilon</hi>, when they commence a syllable, either a very short
straight line, or one or two dots. After the papyrus rolls no copy
is quite without them, from the Codex Alexandrinus, the Cotton
Genesis and Paris-Leyden Pentateuch, Cod. Z and the Isaiah included
in it, to the more recent cursives; although in some manuscripts they
are much rarer than in others. By far the most usual practice is to
put two points, but Cod. Ephraemi, in its <emph>New</emph> Testament portion,
stands nearly alone with the Cotton Genesis (ch. xviii. 9) in exhibiting
the straight line; Cod. Alexandrinus in the Old Testament, but not
in the New, frequently resembles Codd. Ephraemi and the Cotton
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
Genesis in placing a straight line over <hi rend='italic'>iota</hi>, and more rarely over
<hi rend='italic'>upsilon</hi>, instead of the single or double dots; Cod. Sinaiticus employs
two points or a straight line (as in Z's Isaiah) promiscuously over both
vowels, and in Wake 12, a cursive of the eleventh century, the former
frequently pass into the latter in writing. Codd. Borgianus (T) and
Claromont. have but one point; Codd. N and Rossanensis have two for
<hi rend='italic'>iota</hi>, one for <hi rend='italic'>upsilon</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Kappa</hi> deserves notice chiefly because the vertex of the angle
formed by the two inclined lines very frequently does not meet the
perpendicular line, but falls short of it a little to the right: we observe
this in Codd. ANR, Ephraemi, Rossanensis, and later books. The
copies that have strong points at the end of <hi rend='italic'>epsilon</hi> &amp;c. (e.g. Codd.
NR and AZ partly) have the same at the extremity of the thin or
upper limb of <hi rend='italic'>Kappa</hi>. In Cod. D a fine horizontal stroke runs a little
to the left from the bottom of the vertical line. Compare also the initial
letter in Cod. M, No. <ref target='Plate_XII'>32</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Lambda</hi> much resembles <hi rend='italic'>alpha</hi>, but is less complicated. All our
models (except Harl. 5598, No. <ref target='Plate_III'>7</ref>), from the Rosetta stone downwards,
have the right limb longer than the left, which thus leans against its
side, but the length of the projection varies even in the same passage
(e.g. No. <ref target='Plate_IV'>10</ref>). In most copies later than the Herculanean rolls and
Cod. Sinaiticus the shorter line is much the thinner, and the longer
slightly curved. In Cod. Z (Nos. <ref target='Plate_III'>6</ref>, <ref target='Plate_VII'>18</ref>) the projection is curved
elegantly at the end, as we saw in <hi rend='italic'>delta</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mu</hi> varies as much as most letters. Its normal shape, resembling the
English M, is retained in the Rosetta stone and most inscriptions, but at
an early period there was a tendency to make the letter broader, and not
to bring the re-entering or middle angle so low as in English (e.g. Codd.
Vaticanus and Sinaiticus). In Cod. Ephraemi this central angle is
sometimes a little rounded: in Codd. Alex. and Parham 18 the lines
forming the angle do not always spring from the top of the vertical
lines: in Arund. 547 (No. <ref target='Plate_VI'>16</ref>) they spring almost from their foot,
forming a thick inelegant loop below the line, the letter being rather
narrow: Harl. 5598 (No. <ref target='Plate_III'>7</ref>) somewhat resembles this last, only that the
loop is higher up. In the Herculanean rolls (and to a less extent in the
Cotton Genesis) the two outer lines cease to be perpendicular, and lean
outwards until the letter looks much like an inverted W (No. 10). In
the papyrus Hyperides (No. <ref target='Plate_IV'>9</ref>) these outer lines are low curves, and the
central lines rise in a kind of flourish above them. <hi rend='italic'>Mu</hi> assumes this
shape also in Cod. T, and at the end of a line even in Codd. Vaticanus
and Sinaiticus. This form is so much exaggerated in some examples,
that by discarding the outer curves we obtain the shape seen in Cod.
Z (Nos. <ref target='Plate_III'>6</ref>, <ref target='Plate_VII'>18</ref>) and one or two others (e.g. Paul M in Harl. 5613,
No. <ref target='Plate_XII'>34</ref>), almost exactly resembling an inverted pi. So also in the
Isaiah of Cod. Z, only that the left side and base line were made by one
stroke of the pen.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Nu</hi> is easier, the only change (besides the universal transition from
the square to the oblong in the later uncials) being that in a few cases
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
the thin cross line does not pass from the top of the left to the bottom of
the right vertical line as in English (N), but only from about half-way
or two-thirds down the left vertical in the Cotton Genesis, Codd. A,
Rossanensis, Harl. 5598 (No. <ref target='Plate_III'>7</ref>), and others; in Codd. אNR Parham 18
it often neither springs from the top of one, nor reaches the foot of the
other (Nos. <ref target='Plate_II'>4</ref>, <ref target='Plate_II'>5</ref>, <ref target='Plate_IV'>11b</ref>, <ref target='Plate_V'>12</ref>, <ref target='Plate_XIII'>36</ref>); while in Cod. Claromont. (No. <ref target='Plate_XIV'>41</ref>) it is
here and there not far from horizontal. In a few <emph>cursives</emph> (e.g. 440
Evan. at Cambridge, and Tischendorf's lo<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ti</hi> or 61 of the Acts), H and N
almost interchange their shapes: so in Evan. 66 and Wake 34 at the
end of a line only.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Xi</hi> in the Rosetta stone and Herculanean rolls consists of three
parallel straight lines, the middle one being the shortest, as in modern
printed Greek: but all our Biblical manuscripts exhibit modifications of
the small printed ξ, such as must be closely inspected, but cannot easily
be described. In the Cotton Genesis this <hi rend='italic'>xi</hi> is narrow and smaller than
its fellows, much like an old English [Symbol: yogh] resting on a horizontal base which
curves downwards: while in late uncials, as B of the Apocalypse, Cod.
Augiensis (l. 13 Scrivener's <hi rend='italic'>photographed page</hi>), and especially in Parham
18 (No. <ref target='Plate_XIII'>36</ref>), the letter and its flourished finial are continued far below
the line. For the rest we must refer to our facsimile alphabets, &amp;c.
The figures in Cod. Frid.-August. (Nos. <ref target='Plate_I'>2</ref>, <ref target='Plate_IV'>11a</ref>, ll. 3, 8) look particularly
awkward, nor does the shape in Cod. Rossanensis much differ from
these. In Cod. E, the Zurich Psalter of the seventh century, and
Mr. W. White's fragment W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>xi</hi> is the common Z with a large horizontal
line over it, strengthened by knobs at each end.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Omicron</hi> is unchanged, excepting that in the latest uncials (No. <ref target='Plate_VI'>16</ref>, <ref target='Plate_XIII'>36</ref>)
the circle is mostly compressed, like <hi rend='italic'>theta</hi>, into a very eccentric ellipse.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Pi</hi> requires attention. Its original shape was doubtless two vertical
straight lines joined at top by another horizontal, thinner perhaps but
not much shorter than they. Thus we meet with it on the Rosetta
stone, Codd. R, Vatican., Sinaiticus, Ephraemi, Claromontanus, Laud. of
the Acts, the two Pentateuchs, Cureton's Homer, and sometimes Cod. A
(No. <ref target='Plate_V'>12</ref>). The fine horizontal line is, however, slightly produced on
both sides in such early documents as the papyri of Hyperides and
Herculaneum, and in the Cotton Genesis, as well as in Cod. A occasionally<note place='foot'>Cod. A is found in the simpler form in the Old Testament, but mostly with
the horizontal line produced in the New.</note>.
Both extremities of this line are fortified by strong points in
Codd. N and Rossanensis, and mostly in Cod. A, but the left side only
in Cod. Z, and this in Cod. Bezae occasionally becomes a sort of hooked
curve. The later oblong <hi rend='italic'>pi</hi> was usually very plain, with thick vertical
lines and a very fine horizontal, in Arund. 547 (No. <ref target='Plate_VI'>16</ref>) not at all
produced; in Harl. 5598 (No. <ref target='Plate_III'>7</ref>) slightly produced on both sides; in
Parham 18 (No. <ref target='Plate_XIII'>36</ref>) produced only on the right.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rho</hi> is otherwise simple, but in all our authorities except inscriptions
is produced below the line of writing, least perhaps in the papyri and
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
Cod. Claromont., considerably in Codd. AX (Nos. <ref target='Plate_V'>12</ref>, <ref target='Plate_XIII'>38</ref>), most in Parham
18 (No. <ref target='Plate_XIII'>36</ref>): Codd. N, Rossanensis, and many later copies have the
lower extremity boldly <emph>bevelled</emph>. The form is [Symbol like sans-serif bold Roman capital P] rather than [Symbol like serif Roman capital P] in Codd.
אA. In Cod. D a horizontal stroke, longer and thicker than in <hi rend='italic'>kappa</hi>,
runs to the left from the bottom of the vertical line.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Sigma</hi> retains its angular shape ([Symbol] or Σ) only on inscriptions, as the
Rosetta, and that long after the square shapes of <hi rend='italic'>omicron</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>theta</hi> were
discarded. The uncial or semicircular form, however, arose early, and to
this letter must be applied all that was said of <hi rend='italic'>epsilon</hi> as regards terminal
points (a knob at the lower extremity occurs even in Cod. א, e.g. Acts ii.
31), and its cramped shape in later ages.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Tau</hi> in its oldest form consists of two straight lines of like thickness,
the horizontal being bisected by the lower and vertical one. As early as
in Cod. Sinaiticus the horizontal line is made thin, and strengthened on
the left side <emph>only</emph> by a point or small knob (Nos. <ref target='Plate_I'>3</ref>, <ref target='Plate_IV'>11</ref>): thus we find it
in Cod. Laud. of the Acts sometimes. In Cod. Alex. <emph>both</emph> ends are
slightly pointed, in Codd. Ephraemi, Rossanensis, and others much more.
In Cod. Bezae the horizontal is curved and flourished; in the late uncials
the vertical is very thick, the horizontal fine, and the ends formed into
heavy triangles (e.g. No. <ref target='Plate_VI'>16</ref>).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Upsilon</hi> on the Rosetta stone and Herculanean rolls is like our Υ, all
the strokes being of equal thickness and not running below the line: nor
do they in Hyperides or in Codd. XZ and Augiensis, which have the
upper lines neatly curved (Nos. <ref target='Plate_III'>6</ref>, <ref target='Plate_IV'>9</ref>, <ref target='Plate_VII'>18</ref>, <ref target='Plate_XIII'>38</ref>). The right limb of many
of the rest is sometimes, but not always curved; the vertical line in
Codd. Vatican. and Sinaiticus drops slightly below the line; in Codd. A,
Ephraemi, Cotton Genesis, Cureton's Homer, Laud. of the Acts and
Rossanensis somewhat more; in others (as Codd. Bezae NR) considerably.
In the subscription to St. Matthew's Gospel, which may be by a somewhat
later hand, a horizontal line crosses the vertical a little below the curved
lines in Cod. Rossanensis. In later uncials (Nos. <ref target='Plate_III'>7</ref>, <ref target='Plate_XIII'>36</ref>) it becomes
a long or awkward Y, or even degenerates into a long V (No. <ref target='Plate_VI'>16</ref>); or, in
copies written by Latin scribes, into Y reversed. We have described
under <hi rend='italic'>iota</hi> the custom of placing dots, &amp;c. over <hi rend='italic'>upsilon</hi>. But in
Tischendorf's Leipzig II. (fragments from Numbers to Judges of the
seventh or eighth century) <hi rend='italic'>upsilon</hi> receives two dots, <hi rend='italic'>iota</hi> only one.
Once in Cod. Z (Matt. xxi. 5) and oftener in its Isaiah a convex semicircle,
like a circumflex, stands over <hi rend='italic'>upsilon</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Phi</hi> is a remarkable letter. In most copies it is the largest in the
alphabet, quite disproportionately large in Codd. ZL (Paris 62) and others,
and to some extent in Codd. AR, Ephraemi, Rossanensis, and Claromont.
The circle (which in the Cotton Genesis is <emph>sometimes</emph> still a lozenge, see
above, p. <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, note 1), though large and in some copies even too broad
(e.g. No. <ref target='Plate_VII'>18</ref>), is usually in the line of the other letters, the vertical line
being produced <emph>far</emph> upwards (Cod. Augiens. and Nos. <ref target='Plate_VI'>16</ref>, <ref target='Plate_XIV'>41</ref>), or downwards
(No. <ref target='Plate_IV'>10</ref>), or both (No. <ref target='Plate_XIII'>36</ref>). On the Rosetta stone the circle is
very small and the straight line short.
</p>

<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Chi</hi> is a simple transverse cross (Χ) and never goes above or below the
line. The limb that inclines from left to right is in the uncial form
for the most part thick, the other thin (with final points according to the
practice stated for <hi rend='italic'>epsilon</hi>), and this limb or both (as in Cod. Z) a little
curved.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Psi</hi> is a rare but trying letter. Its oldest form resembled an English
V with a straight line running up bisecting its interior angle. On the
Rosetta stone it had already changed into its present form (Ψ), the curve
being a small semicircle, the vertical rising above the other letters and
falling a little below the line. In the Cotton Genesis <hi rend='italic'>psi</hi> is rather taller
than the rest, but the vertical line does not rise above the level of the circle.
In Codd. ANR and Rossanensis the under line is prolonged: in R the two
limbs are straight lines making an angle of about 45° with the vertical,
while oftentimes in Hyperides and Cod. Augiensis (Scrivener's <hi rend='italic'>photograph</hi>,
ll. 18, 23) they curve <emph>downwards</emph>; the limbs in N and R being strongly
(slightly in Rossanensis) pointed at the ends, and the bottom of the
vertical bevelled as usual. In Cod. B of the Apocalypse, in Evan.
OW<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>Ξ, and even in Hyperides, the limbs (strongly pointed) fall into
a straight line, and the figure becomes a large cross (No. <ref target='Plate_III'>7</ref>). In Evan.
66 the vertical is crossed above the semicircle by a minute horizontal
line.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Omega</hi> took the form Ω, even when <hi rend='italic'>omicron</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>theta</hi> were square;
thus it appears on the Rosetta stone, but in the Hyperides and Herculaneum
rolls it is a single curve, much like the w of English writing, only
that the central part is sometimes only a low double curve (No. <ref target='Plate_IV'>10</ref>, l. 6).
In the Cotton Genesis, Codd. Vatican., Sinaiticus, Alex., Ephraemi, Bezae,
Claromont., Nitriens., Rossanensis, there is little difference in shape,
though sometimes Cod. Vatican. comes near the Herculanean rolls, and
Cod. Alex, next to it: elsewhere their strokes (especially those in the
centre) are fuller and more laboured. Yet in Cod. N it is often but
a plain semicircle, bisected by a perpendicular radius, with the ends of
the curve bent inwards (No. <ref target='Plate_V'>14</ref>, l. 2). In the late uncials (Nos. <ref target='Plate_III'>7</ref>, <ref target='Plate_VI'>16</ref>) it
almost degenerates into an ungraceful W, while in Cod. Augiensis (<hi rend='italic'>photograph</hi>,
l. 18) the first limb is occasionally a complete circle.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
These details might be indefinitely added to by references to
other codices and monuments of antiquity, but we have employed
most of the principal copies of the Greek Testament, and have
indicated to the student the chief points to which his attention
should be drawn. Three leading principles have perhaps been
sufficiently established by the foregoing examples:
</p>

<p>
First, that the uncials used in writing differ from the capitals
cut in stone by the curved shapes which the writing hand
naturally adopts<note place='foot'>See Maunde Thompson's <q>Greek and Latin Palaeography.</q></note>.
</p>

<p>
Secondly, that the upright uncials of square dimensions
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
are more ancient than those which are narrow, oblong, or
<emph>leaning</emph><note place='foot'>Codd. B of Apocalypse, Θ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi> Λ (No. <ref target='Plate_XI'>30</ref>) of the Gospels, and Silvestre's No. 68,
all of about the eighth century, slope more or less to the right; Cod. Γ (No. <ref target='Plate_XII'>35</ref>) of
the ninth century, a very little to the left. Tischendorf assigns to the seventh
century the fragments comprising Leipzig II. (see p. <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>), though they lean much
to the right (Monum. sacra ined. tom. i, pp. xxx-xxxiv, 141-176), and those of
Isaiah (ibid. pp. xxxvi, xxxvii, 187-199).</note>.
</p>

<p>
Thirdly, that the simpler and less elaborate the style of
writing, the more remote is its probable date.
</p>

<p>
Copies of a later age occasionally aim at imitating the fashion
of an earlier period, or possibly the style of the older book from
which their text is drawn. But this anachronism of fashion
may be detected, as well by other circumstances we are soon to
mention, as from the air of constraint which pervades the whole
manuscript: the rather as the scribe will now and then fall into
the more familiar manner of his contemporaries; especially
when writing those small letters which our Biblical manuscripts
of all dates (even the most venerable) perpetually crowd into the
ends of lines, in order to save space.
</p>

<p>
11. We do not intend to dwell much on the cursive handwriting.
No books of the Greek Scriptures earlier than the
ninth century in this style are now extant<note place='foot'>The earliest cursive Biblical manuscript formerly alleged, i.e. Evan. 14, on
examination proves to have no inscription whatever. <q>On folio 392, in a comparatively
modern hand, is rather uncouthly written ἐγράφη νικηφόρου βασιλεύοντος
A. Z. What the initials A. Z. stand for I do not know.</q> (Dean Burgon,
Guardian, Jan. 15, 1873.) The claim of priority for Cod. 14 being thus disposed
of (though it must be noted that Dr. C. R. Gregory refers it without doubt to the
tenth century), we may note that Cod. 429 of the Gospels is dated 978, Cod. 148
of the Acts 984, Cod. 5<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>pe</hi> 994, and Λ, written partly in cursives, and partly in uncials
is of the ninth century. But the date May 7, 835 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> is plainly visible on
Cod. 481, which is therefore indisputably the earliest.</note>, though it was
prevalent long before in the intercourse of business or common
life. The papyri of Hyperides (e.g. No. <ref target='Plate_IV'>9</ref>) and the Herculanean
rolls, in a few places, show that the process had then commenced,
for the letters of each word are often joined, and
their shapes prove that swiftness of execution was more aimed
at than distinctness. This is seen even more clearly in a
petition to Ptolemy Philometor (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 164) represented in the
<q>Paléographie Universelle</q> (No. 56). The same great work
contains (No. 66) two really cursive charters of the Emperors
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
Maurice (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 600) and Heraclius (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 616). Other instances
of early cursive writing may be found in two Deeds of Sale,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 616, and 599, a Manumission in 355, an Official Deed in 233,
a Deed of Sale in 154, in Aristotle on the Constitution of Athens,
about 100, in a Farm Account in 78-79, in a Receipt in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 20,
in the Casati contract in <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 114, in a Letter on Egyptian Contracts
in 146, a Treasury Circular in 170, in a Steward's letter
of the third century <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, in various documents of the same
century lying in the British Museum, at Paris, Berlin, Leyden,
and elsewhere, of which the oldest, being amongst the papyri
discovered by Dr. Flinders Petrie at Gurob is referred to <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 268,
and the Leyden papyrus to 260<note place='foot'>See Maunde Thompson, Greek and Latin Palaeology, chap. x. pp. 130, &amp;c.,
and chap. viii. pp. 107, &amp;c; Notices et Extracts des MSS. de la Bibliothèque
Imperiale, Paris, plate xxiv. no. 21, pl. xlviii. no. 21 <hi rend='italic'>ter</hi>, xlvi. no. 69, <hi rend='italic'>e</hi>, xxi. no.
17, xiii. no. 5, xl. no. 62, xviii. 2, pl. xliv; Cat. Gr. Papyri in Brit. Mus.
Palaeograph. Soc. ii. pl. 143, 144, Mahaffy, Petrie Papyri, pl. xiv, xxix. &amp;c.
(Cunningham Memoirs of R. Irish Academy).</note>. Yet the earliest books of a later
age known to be written in cursive letters are Cod. 481 (Scholz
461, dated <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 835) the Bodleian Euclid (dated <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 888) and
the twenty-four dialogues of Plato in the same Library (dated
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 895)<note place='foot'>At the end of the Euclid we read εγραφη χειρι στεφανου κληρικου μηνι σεπτεμβριωι
ινδ. <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ζ</hi> ετει κοσμου <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ς</hi> <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>τ</hi> <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ω</hi> <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ζ</hi>
εκτησαμην αρεθας πατρευς την παρουσαν βιβλιον: of
the Plato, εγραφη χειρι ιω καλλιγραφου; ευτυχως αρεθη διακονωι πατρει; νομισματων
βυζαντϊεων δεκα και τριων; μηνι νοεμβριωι ινδικτιωνος <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ιδ</hi>; ετει κοσμου <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ςυδ</hi> βαςιλειας
λεοντος του φιλοχυ υιου βασιλειου του αειμνιστου. It should be stated that these
very curious books, both written by monks, and indeed <emph>all the dated manuscripts
of the Greek Testament we have seen</emph> except Canonici 34 in the Bodleian (which
reckons from the Christian era, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1515-6), calculate from the Greek era of the
Creation, September 1, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 5508. To obtain the year <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, therefore, from
January 1 to August 31 in any year, subtract 5508 from the given year; from
September 1 to December 31 subtract 5509. The indiction which usually
accompanies this date is a useful check in case of any corruption or want of
legibility in the letters employed as numerals. Both dates are given in Evan.
558, viz. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.m.</hi> 6938, and <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1430.</note>. There is reason to believe, from the comparatively
unformed character of the writing in them all, that Burney 19
in the British Museum (from which we have extracted the
alphabet No. 8, Plate <ref target='Plate_III'>iii</ref>), and the minute, beautiful and
important Codex l of the Gospels at Basle (of which see a
facsimile No. <ref target='Plate_IX'>23</ref>), are but little later than the Oxford books,
and may be referred to the tenth century. Books copied after
the cursive hand had become regularly formed, in the eleventh,
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
twelfth and thirteenth centuries, are hard to be distinguished by
the mere handwriting, though they are often dated, or their age
fixed by the material (see p. <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>), or the style of their illuminations.
Colbert. 2844, or 33 of the Gospels (facsim. No. <ref target='Plate_XIII'>39</ref>), is
attributed to the eleventh century, and Burney 21 (No. <ref target='Plate_VI'>15</ref>)<note place='foot'>The writer of Burney 21 (r<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>) <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1292 (Evan. 571), ὁ ταπεινος Θεοδωρος
ἁγιωπετριτης ταχα και καλλιγραφος as he calls himself (that is, as I once supposed,
monk of the Convent of Sancta Petra at Constantinople, short-hand and fair
writer), was the scribe of at least <emph>five</emph> more copies of Scripture now extant:
Birch's Havn. 1, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1278 (Evan. 234); Evan. 90, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1293; Evan. 543, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1295; Scholz's Evan. 412, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1301; Evan. 74, <hi rend='italic'>undated</hi>. To this list Franz
Delitzsch (1813-1890) (Zeitschr. f. luth. Theol. 1863, ii, Abhandlungen, pp.
217, 218) adds from Matthaei, Synaxarion in Mosc. Syn. Typograph. xxvi. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1295,
and recognizes <hi rend='italic'>Hagios Petros</hi>, the country of Theodoros, as a town in the Morea,
on the borders of Arcadia, from whose school students have attended his own
lectures at Erlangen.</note>, is
dated <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1292, and afford good examples of their respective
dates. <hi rend='italic'>Beta</hi> (l. 1 letter 4), <emph>when joined to other letters</emph>, is barely
distinguishable from <hi rend='italic'>upsilon</hi><note place='foot'>Hence in the later uncials, some of which must therefore have been copied
from earlier cursives, Β and Υ (which might seem to have no resemblance) are
sometimes confounded: e.g. in Parham 18 (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 980), υ for β, Luke vi. 34; β for υ,
John x. 1, especially where β begins or ends a line: e.g. Evan. 59, John vii. 35.
Evan. 59 has β for υ very often, yet there is no extra trace that it was copied
from an uncial.</note>; <hi rend='italic'>nu</hi> is even nearer to <hi rend='italic'>mu</hi>; the
tall forms of <hi rend='italic'>eta</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>epsilon</hi> are very graceful, the whole style
elegant and, after a little practice, easily read. Burney 22
(facsimile No. <ref target='Plate_XIII'>37</ref>) is dated about the same time, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1319, and
the four Biblical lines much resemble Burney 21<note place='foot'>The full signature not easily deciphered is ἐτελειώθη τὸ παρὸν ἅγιον εὐαγγέλιον
κατὰ τὴν <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>κ</hi>ζ τοῦ ἰαννουαρίου μηνὸς τῆς [?] <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ω</hi> <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>κ</hi>
ζ ἐγχρονίας. Presuming that <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ς</hi> is
suppressed before <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ω</hi> <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>κ</hi> ζ this is 6827 of the Greeks, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1319.</note>. In the
fourteenth century a careless style came into fashion, of which
Cod. Leicestrensis (No. <ref target='Plate_XIII'>40</ref>) is an exaggerated instance, and
during this century and the next our manuscripts, though not
devoid of a certain beauty of appearance, are too full of arbitrary
and elaborate contractions to be conveniently read. The
formidable list of abbreviations and ligatures represented in
Donaldson's Greek Grammar (p. 20, third edition)<note place='foot'>Compare also Buttmann's Greek Grammar (Robinson's translation) p. 467; Bast
in (Schaefer's Gregorius Corinthius) tabb. ad fin.; Gardthausen, Palaeographie,
p. 248, &amp;c.</note> originated at
this period in the perverse ingenuity of the Greek emigrants in
the West of Europe, who subsisted by their skill as copyists;
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
and these pretty puzzles (for such they now are to many a fair
classical scholar), by being introduced into early printed books<note place='foot'>Thus the type cast for the Royal Printing Office at Paris, and used by
Robert Stephen, is said to have been modelled on the style of the calligrapher
Angelus Vergecius, from whose skill arose the expression <q>he writes like an
angel.</q> Codd. 296 of the Gospels, 124 of the Acts, 151 of St. Paul are in his hand.</note>,
have largely helped to withdraw them from use in modern times.
</p>

<p>
12. We have now to describe the practice of Biblical
manuscripts as regards the insertion of ι forming a diphthong
with the long vowels <hi rend='italic'>eta</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>omega</hi>, also with <hi rend='italic'>alpha</hi> long,
whether by being <hi rend='italic'>ascript</hi>, i.e. written by their side, or <hi rend='italic'>subscript</hi>,
i.e. written under them. In the earliest inscriptions and in the
papyri of Thebes ι <hi rend='italic'>ascript</hi> (the iota not smaller than other
letters) is invariably found. In the petition to Ptolemy
Philometor (<hi rend='italic'>above</hi>, p. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>) it occurs four times in the first line,
three times in the third: in the fragments of Hyperides it is
perpetually though not always read, even where (especially with
verbs) it has no rightful place, e.g. ετωι και αντιβολωι (facsimile
No. <ref target='Plate_IV'>9</ref>, ll. 3, 4) for αἰτῶ καὶ ἀντιβολῶ. A little before the Christian
era it began to grow obsolete, probably from its being lost in
pronunciation. In the Herculanean Philodemus (the possible
limits of whose date are from <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 50 to <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 79) as in Evann.
556, 604 (Matt. ii. 12, 13), it is often dropped, though more
usually written. In Codd. Vaticanus and Sinaiticus it is
probably not found, and from this period it almost disappears
from Biblical uncials<note place='foot'>Yet Tischendorf (N. T. 1859, Proleg. p. cxxxiii) cites ηιδισαν from Cod. Bezae
(Mark i. 34), ξυλωι (Luke xxiii. 31) from Cod. Cyprius, ωι from Cod. U (Matt.
xxv. 15) and Cod. Λ (Luke vii. 4). Add Cod. Bezae πατρωιου Acts xxii. 3, Scrivener's
edition, Introd. p. xix. Bentley's nephew speaks of ι <hi rend='italic'>ascript</hi> as in the first
hand of Cod. B, but he seems to have been mistaken.</note>; in Cureton's Homer, of the fifth or
perhaps of the sixth century, ι <hi rend='italic'>ascript</hi> is sometimes neglected,
but usually inserted; sometimes also ι is placed <emph>above</emph> Η or Ω,
an arrangement neither neat nor convenient. With the cursive
character ι <hi rend='italic'>ascript</hi> came in again, as may be seen from the
subscriptions in the Bodleian Euclid and Plato (p. 42, note 1).
The <hi rend='italic'>semicursive</hi> fragment of St. Paul's Epistles in red letters
(M of St. Paul, Plate <ref target='Plate_XII'>xii</ref> No. 34), used for the binding of Harleian
5613, contains ι <hi rend='italic'>ascript</hi> twice, but I have tried in vain to verify
Griesbach's statement (Symbol. Crit. ii. p. 166) that it has ι
<hi rend='italic'>subscript</hi> <q>bis tantum aut ter.</q> I can find no such instance in
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
these leaves. The cursive manuscripts, speaking generally,
either entirely omit both forms, or, if they give either, far more
often neglect than insert them. Cod. 1 of the Gospels exhibits the
<hi rend='italic'>ascript</hi> ι. Of forty-three codices now in England which have been
examined with a view to this matter, twelve have no vestige of
either fashion, fifteen represent the <hi rend='italic'>ascript</hi> use, nine the <hi rend='italic'>subscript</hi>
exclusively, while the few that remain exhibit both indifferently<note place='foot'>In B-C iii. 10 (<hi rend='italic'>dated</hi> 1430), the whole manuscript being written by the same
hand, we have ι <hi rend='italic'>ascript</hi> twenty-five times up to Luke i. 75, then on the same page
ι <hi rend='italic'>subscript</hi> in Luke i. 77 and eighty-five times afterwards: the two usages are nowhere
mixed. In Evan. 558, <hi rend='italic'>subscript</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>ascript</hi> are mixed in the same page,
Luc. i. 75, 77.</note>.
The earliest cursive copy ascertained to exhibit ι <hi rend='italic'>subscript</hi> is
Matthaei's r (Apoc. 50<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> [x]), and after that the Cod. Ephesius
(Evan. 71), dated <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1160. The <hi rend='italic'>subscript</hi> ι came much into vogue
during the fifteenth century, and thus was adopted in printed books.
</p>

<p>
13. Breathings (<foreign rend='italic'>spiritus</foreign>) and accents<note place='foot'>The invention of breathings, accents, and stops is attributed to Aristophanes
of Byzantium, 260 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi></note> were not applied
systematically to Greek Texts before the seventh century. But
a practice prevailed in that and the succeeding century of
inserting them in older manuscripts, where they were absent
<foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign>. That such was done in many instances (e.g.
in Codd. Vatican. and Coislin. 202 or H of St. Paul) appears
clearly from the fact that the passages which the scribe who
retouched the old letters for any cause left unaltered, are
destitute of these marks, though they appear in all other places.
Cod. א exhibits breathings, apparently by the original scribe, in
Tobit vi. 9; Gal. v. 21 only. The case of Cod. Alexandrinus is
less easy. Though the rest of the book has neither breathings
(except a few here and there) nor accents, the first four lines of
<emph>each</emph> column of the book of Genesis (see facsimile No. <ref target='Plate_V'>12</ref>), which
are written in red, are fully furnished with them. These marks
Baber, who edited the Old Testament portion of Cod. A, pronounced
to be by a second hand (Notae, p. 1); Sir Frederick
Madden, a more competent judge, declares them the work of the
original scribe (Madden's Silvestre, Vol. i. p. 194, note), and
after repeated examination we know not how to dissent from his
view<note place='foot'>See below vol. ii. c. ix. 9. note, end. Dr. Scrivener appears not to have
formed a positive opinion, which indeed in some of these cases is hardly possible.</note>. So too in the Sarravian Pentateuch of the fifth century
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
we read ΤΟΝΥΝ [with several symbols written over the Υ] (Lev. xi. 7) by the first hand. The Cureton
palimpsest of Homer also has them, though they are occasionally
obliterated, and some few are evidently inserted by a corrector;
the case is nearly so with the Milan Homer edited by Mai; and
the same must be stated of the Vienna Dioscorides (Silvestre,
No. 62), whose date is fixed by internal evidence to about <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
500. In the papyrus fragment of the Psalms, now in the British
Museum, the accents are very accurate, and the work of the
original scribe. These facts, and others like these, may make us
hesitate to adopt the notion generally received among scholars
on the authority of Montfaucon (Palaeogr. Graec. p. 33), that
breathings and accents were not introduced <foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign> before
the seventh or eighth century; although up to that period, no
doubt, they were placed very incorrectly, and often omitted
altogether. The breathings are much the more ancient and
important of the two. The <foreign rend='italic'>spiritus lenis</foreign> indeed may be a mere
invention of the Alexandrian grammarians of the second or third
century before Christ, but the <foreign rend='italic'>spiritus asper</foreign> is in fact the
substitute for a real letter (H) which appears on the oldest
inscriptions; its original shape being the first half of the H ([symbol like the left half of a Roman capital letter H]),
of which the second half was subsequently adopted for the <foreign rend='italic'>lenis</foreign>
([symbol like the right half of a Roman capital H]). This form is sometimes found in manuscripts of about the
eleventh century (e.g. Lebanon, B.M. Addit. 11300 or k<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>, and
usually in Lambeth 1178 or d<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>) ed. of 1550, but even in the
Cod. Alexandrinus the comma and inverted comma are several
times substituted to represent the <foreign rend='italic'>lenis</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>asper</foreign> respectively
(facsimile No. <ref target='Plate_V'>12</ref>): and at a later period this last was the ordinary,
though not quite the invariable, mode of expressing the breathings.
Aristophanes of Byzantium (keeper of the famous Library
at Alexandria under Ptolemy Euergetes, about <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 240), though
probably not the inventor of the Greek accents, was the first to
arrange them in a system. Accentuation must have been
a welcome aid to those who employed Greek as a learned,
though not as their vernacular tongue, and is so convenient and
suggestive that no modern scholar can afford to dispense with its
familiar use: yet not being, like the rough breathing, an essential
portion of the language, it was but slowly brought into
general vogue. It would seem that in Augustine's age [354-430]
the distinction between the smooth and rough breathing in the
manuscripts was just such a point as a careful reader would
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
mark, a hasty one overlook<note place='foot'>He is speaking (Quaestion. super Genes. clxii) of the difference between
ῥάβδου αὐτοῦ and ῥάβδου αὑτοῦ, Gen. xlvii. 31. <q>Fallit enim eos verbum Graecum,
quod eisdem literis scribitur, sive <emph>ejus</emph>, sive <emph>suae</emph>: sed accentus [he must mean the
breathings] dispares sunt, et ab eis, qui ista noverunt, in codicibus non contemnuntur</q>
(Opera, Tom. iv. p. 53, ed. 1586, Lugdun.); adding that <q>suae</q> <emph>might</emph> be
expressed by ἑαυτοῦ.</note>. Hence it is not surprising that
though these marks are entirely absent both from the Theban
and Herculanean papyri, a few breathings are apparently by the
first hand in Cod. Borgianus or T (Tischendorf, N. T. 1859,
Proleg. p. cxxxi). One rough breathing is just visible in that
early palimpsest of St. John's Gospel, I<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi> or N<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>. Such as appear,
together with some accents, in the Coislin Octateuch of the
sixth or seventh century, may not the less be <foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign>
because many pages are destitute of them; those of Cod. Claromontanus,
which were once deemed original, are now pronounced
by its editor Tischendorf to be a later addition. Cod. N, the
purple fragment so often spoken of already, exhibits <foreign rend='italic'>primâ
manu</foreign> over certain vowels a kind of smooth breathing or slight
acute accent, sometimes little larger than a point, but inserted on
no intelligible principle, so far as we can see, and far oftener
omitted entirely. All copies of Scripture which have not been
specified, down to the end of the seventh century, are quite
destitute of breathings and accents. An important manuscript
of the eighth or ninth century, Cod. L or Paris 62 of the Gospels,
has them for the most part, but not always; though often in the
wrong place, and at times in utter defiance of all grammatical
rules. Cod. B of the Apocalypse, however, though of the same
age, has breathings and accents as constantly and correctly as
most. Codices of the ninth century, with the exception of three
written in the West of Europe (Codd. Augiensis or Paul F,
Sangallensis or Δ of the Gospels, and Boernerianus or Paul G,
which will be particularly described afterwards), are all accompanied
with these marks in full, though often set down
without any precise rule, so far as our experience has enabled
us to observe. The uncial Evangelistaria (e.g. Arundel 547;
Parham 18; Harleian 5598), especially, are much addicted to
prefixing the <foreign rend='italic'>spiritus asper</foreign> improperly; chiefly, perhaps, to
words beginning with H, so that documents of that age are but
slender authorities on such points. Of the cursives the general
tendency is to be more and more accurate as regards the accentuation,
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
the later the date: but this is only a general rule, as some
that are early are as careful, and certain of the latest as
negligent, as can well be imagined. All of them are partial
to placing accents or breathings over both parts of a word compounded
with a preposition (e.g. ἐπὶσυνάξαι), and on the other
hand often drop them between a preposition and its case (e.g.
ἐπάροτρον).
</p>

<p>
14. The punctuation in early times was very simple. In the
papyri of Hyperides there are no stops at all, in the Herculanean
rolls exceeding few: Codd. Sinaiticus and Vaticanus (the latter
very rarely by the first hand) have a single point here and there
on a level with the top of the letters, and occasionally a very
small break in the continuous uncials, with or (as always in
Cod. I<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi> of the sixth century) without the point, to denote a pause
in the sense. Codd. A N have the same point a little oftener;
in Codd. C W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi> (Paris 314) Z and the Cotton Genesis the single
point stands indiscriminately at the head, middle, or foot of the
letters, while in E (Basil. A. N. iii. 12) of the Gospels and B of
the Apocalypse, as in Cod. Marchalianus of the Prophets (sixth
or seventh century), this change in the position of the point
indicates a full-stop, half stop, or comma respectively. In Cod. L,
of the same date as Codd. E and B (Apoc.), besides the full point
we have the comma (::.) and semicolon (::), with a cross also for
a stop. In Codd. Y Θ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi> (of about the eighth century) the single
point has its various powers as in Cod. E, &amp;c., but besides this
are double, treble, and in Cod. Y quadruple, points with different
powers. In late uncials, especially Evangelistaria, the chief
stop is a cross, often in red (e.g. Arund. 547); while in Harleian
5598 [symbol like three ovals] seems to be the note of interrogation<note place='foot'>In the Gale Evangelistarium (Trin. Coll. Camb. O. 4. 22) the interrogative
clause is set between two such marks in red. Hence it seems not so much a stop
as a vocal note. In the Armenian and Spanish languages the note of interrogation
is set before the interrogative clause, and very conveniently too.</note>. When the continuous
writing came to be broken up into separate words (of
which Cod. Augiensis in the ninth century affords one of the
earliest examples) the single point was intended to be placed
after the last letter of each word, on a level with the middle of
the letters. But even in this copy it is often omitted in parts,
and in Codd. ΔG, written on the same plan, more frequently
still. Our statements refer only to the Greek portions of these
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
copies; the Latin semicolon (;) and the note of interrogation (?)
occur in their Latin versions. The Greek interrogation (;) first
occurs about the ninth century, and (,) used as a stop a little later.
The Bodleian Genesis of this date, or a little earlier, uses (,) also
as an interrogative: so in later times B-C. iii. 5 [xii], and Evan.
556 [xii]. In the earliest cursives the system of punctuation
is much the same as that of printed books: the English colon (:)
not being much used, but the upper single point in its stead<note place='foot'>The earliest known example of the use of two dots occurs in the Artemisia
papyrus at Vienna (Maunde Thompson, p. 69), and other early instances are
found in a letter of Dionysius to Ptolemy about <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 160, published by the
French Institute, 1865, in <q>Papyrus grecs du Musée du Louvre,</q> &amp;c. tom. xviii.
2<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> ptie, pl. xxxiv, pap. 49, and in fragments of the Phaedo of Plato discovered
at Gurob. The same double points are also occasionally set in the larger spaces
of Codd. Sinaiticus, Sarravianus, and Bezae, but in the last-named copy for the
most part in a later hand.</note>.
In a few cursives (e.g. Gonville or 59 of the Gospels), this upper
point, set in a larger space, stands also for a full stop: indeed
(·) is the only stop found in Tischendorf's lo<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ti</hi> or 61 of the Acts
(Brit. Mus. Add. 20,003): while (;) and (·) are often confused in
440 of the Gospels (Cantab. Mm. 6. 9). The English comma,
placed above a letter, is used for the apostrophus, which occurs
in the very oldest uncials, especially at the end of proper names,
or to separate compounds (e.g. απ᾽ ορφανισθεντες in Cod. Clarom.),
or when the word ends in ξ or ρ (e.g. σαρξ᾽ in Cod. B, θυγατηρ᾽
in Codd. Sinait. and A, χειρ᾽ in Cod. A, ὡσπερ᾽ in the Dioscorides,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 500), or even to divide syllables (e.g. συριγ᾿γας in Cod.
Frid.-August., πολ᾿λα, κατεστραμ᾿μενη, αναγ᾿γελι in Cod. Sinaiticus).
In Cod. Z it is found only after αλλ and μεθ, but in Z's
Isaiah it indicates other elisions (e.g. επ). This mark is more
rare in Cod. Ephraemi than in some others, but is used more or
less by all, and is found after εξ, or ουχ, and a few like words,
even in the most recent cursives. In Cod. Bezae and others it
assumes the shape of &gt; rather than that of a comma.
</p>

<p>
15. Abbreviated words are perhaps least met with in Cod.
Vatican., but even it has <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>θσ</hi>, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>κσ</hi>, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ισ</hi>,
<hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>χσ</hi>, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>πνα</hi> for θεός, κύριος,
ἰησοῦς, χριστός, πνεῦμα, &amp;c. and their cases.
[Transcriber's Note: In this e-book, underlines are used to represent the overlines
used in the paper book.]
The Cotton Genesis
has <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>θου</hi> ch. i. 27 by a later hand, but θεου ch. xli. 38. Besides
these Codd. Sinaiticus, Alex., Ephraemi and the rest supply
<hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ανοσ</hi>, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ουνοσ</hi>, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>πηρ</hi> (<hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>πρ</hi>
Cod. Sarrav. Num. xii. 14, &amp;c., <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>πτηρ</hi> Cod.
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
Rossanensis), <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>μηρ</hi>, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ιλημ</hi> or <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ιηλμ</hi> or <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ιλμ</hi> or <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ιηό</hi> (<hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ιελμ</hi> Cod. Sarrav.),
<hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ιηϊ</hi> or <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ισλ</hi> or <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ισηλ</hi>, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>δαδ</hi>, and some of them <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>σηρ</hi> for σωτήρ, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>υσ</hi>
for υἱός, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>παρνξς</hi> [with a theta above the line] for παρθένος (Bodleian Genesis), <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>σρσ</hi> for σταυρός:
Cod. L has πνε<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>υ</hi>, and Cod. Vatican. in the <hi rend='italic'>Old</hi> Testament <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ανοσ</hi>
and <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>πρσ</hi> occasionally, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ἐθν</hi> and <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ιλημ</hi> or <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ιλμ</hi> often<note place='foot'>Abbot, ubi supra.</note>; Evan. 604 has
<hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>σηρ</hi> for σωτήρ, and <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ἐθν</hi> for ἐθνῶν<note place='foot'>Hoskier, Cod. 604, p. xiii.</note>. Cod. Bezae always writes at
length ανθρωπος, μητηρ, υἱος, σωτηρ, οὐρανος, δαυειδ, ἰσραηλ,
ἱερουσαλημ; but abridges the sacred names into <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>χρσ</hi>, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ιησ</hi><note place='foot'>Even Codex Sinaiticus has <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ιηυ</hi> and <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ιυ</hi> in consecutive lines (Apoc. xxii. 20, 21),
and <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>χρυ</hi> Rom. vii. 4.</note> &amp;c. and
their cases, as very frequently, but by no means invariably, do
the kindred Codd. Augiens., Sangall., and Boerner. Cod. Z
seldom abridges, and all copies often set υἱος in full. A few dots
sometimes supply the place of the line denoting abbreviation
(e.g. θσ [with dots over the letters] Cotton Genesis, ανοσ [with dots over the letters] Colbert. Pentateuch). A straight
line over the last letter of a line, sometimes over any vowel,
indicates N (or also M in the Latin of Codd. Bezae and Claromont.)
in all the Biblical uncials, but is placed only over
numerals in the Herculanean rolls: κ [with tilde below and to the right],
τ [with tilde below and to the right], and less often θ [with tilde below and to the right] for
καί (see p. <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>, note 1), -ται, -θαι are met with in Cod. Sinaiticus
and all later except Cod. Z: [symbol somewhat like Arabic number 8] for ου chiefly in Codd. L,
Augiensis, B of the Apocalypse, and the more recent uncials.
Such <foreign rend='italic'>compendia scribendi</foreign> as [symbol like Pi with Rho] in the Herculanean rolls (above
p. <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>) occur mostly at the end of lines: that form, with ΜΥ [with small circle between the letters]
(No. <ref target='Plate_IV'>11</ref> a, l. 4), and a few more even in the Cod. Sinaiticus; in
Cod. Sarrav. Μ [with small circle over the letter] stands for both μου and μοι; in Cureton's
Homer we have Π<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ς</hi> for πους, Σ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ς</hi> for -σας and such like. In later
books they are more numerous and complicated, particularly in
cursive writing. The terminations [small raised circle] for ος, [horizontal line] for ν, [symbol like left single quotation mark] or [symbol like two left quotation marks] for
ον, [symbol like right double quotation mark] for αις, [symbol like tilde] for ων or ω or ως, [symbol like raised small sigma] for ης, [symbol like raised small upsilon] for ου are familiar;
besides others, peculiar to one or a few copies, e.g. τγ for ττ in
Burney 19, and Burdett-Coutts i. 4, h for αυ, b for ερ, &mdash; for α,
[symbol like horizontal line with circle at right edge] for αρ in the Emmanuel College copy of the Epistles (Paul 30,
No. <ref target='Plate_XII'>33</ref>), and [symbol like colon] for α, [symbol like small raised capital sigma] or [symbol like raised small sigma] for αν, [symbol like square root symbol] for ας in Parham 17 of the
Apocalypse. Other more rare abridgements are [symbol like two raised small sigmas] for εις in
Wake 12, [square root sign] (Burdett-Coutts I. 4) or &lt; or [raised small alpha] for εν, [symbol like two dots] for ι and
[symbol like Hebrew letter Tet with two dots over it] for εσ (B-C. iii. 37), [symbol like two dots with comma below them] for εσ and ε for σε and [symbol like tilde over Rho over Tau] for τησ (B-C.
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
ii. 26), [symbol] for ται and [symbol] for ωσ (B-C. iii. 42), [symbol] for ην (B-C. iii. 10),
[symbol] for ισ and ὀ or [symbol] for ουν (B-C. iii. 41), [symbol] for ιν or ἐστι, [symbol] for αν,
[symbol] or [symbol] for οις, [symbol] for ας, [symbol] or [symbol] for οις, [symbol] for τε or -τες or τθν or
τον, [symbol] for ειν, [symbol] for ους or ως (Gale O. iv. 22). The mark &gt; is
not only met with in the Herculanean rolls, but in the Hyperides
(facsimile <ref target='Plate_IV'>9</ref>, l. 6), in Codd. Vaticanus and Sinaiticus, the two
Pentateuchs, Codd. Augiensis, Sangall. and Boernerianus, and
seems merely designed to fill up vacant space, like the flourishes
in a legal instrument<note place='foot'>See below p. <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, note 4.</note>.
</p>

<p>
16. Capital letters of a larger size than the rest at the
beginning of clauses, &amp;c. are freely met with in all documents
excepting in the oldest papyri, the Herculanean rolls, Codd.
Vaticanus, Sinaiticus, the Colbert Pentateuch, Isaiah in Cod. Z,
and one or two fragments besides<note place='foot'><q>Fragmenta pauca evangelii Johannis palimpsesta Londinensia [Evan. I<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi> or
N<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>]. In ceteris haec fere tria: Dionis Cassii fragmenta Vaticana&mdash;vix enim qui
in his videntur speciem majorum litterarum habere revera differunt&mdash;item fragmenta
palimpsesta [Phaëthontis] Euripidis Claromontana et fragmenta Menandri
Porphiriana</q> (Tischendorf, Cod. Vatic. Proleg. p. xviii, 1867).</note>. Their absence is a proof
of high antiquity. Yet even in Codd. Vaticanus, Sinaiticus, and
Sarravianus, which is the other part of the Colbert Pentateuch
(in the first most frequently in the earlier portions of the Old
Testament), the initial letter stands a little outside the line of
writing after a break in the sense, whether the preceding line
had been quite filled up or not. Such breaks occur more regularly
in Codex Bezae, as will appear when we come to describe
it<note place='foot'>The English word <hi rend='italic'>paragraph</hi> is derived from the παραγραφαί, which are often
straight lines, placed in the margin to indicate a pause in the sense. Professor
Abbot, ubi supra, p. <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>, alleges not a few instances where these dashes are thus
employed. A specimen is given in Scrivener's Cod. Sinaiticus, facsimile <ref target='Plate_I'>3</ref>: see
his Cod. Sin., Introduction, p. xl and note. Thus also they appear in Cod.
Sarravianus (Tischendorf, Mon. sacra ined. vol. iii. pp. xiv, xx). In Cod Bezae
[symbol] is set in the margin forty-nine times by a later hand, and must be designed
for the same purpose, though the mark sometimes occurs where we should hardly
look for it (Scrivener, Cod. Bezae, Introduction, p. xxviii and note). In Cod.
Marchalianus the dash stands over the capital at the beginning of a line, or over
the first letter where there is no capital. Lastly, in Codd. Vatic. and Sinait. [symbol] is
sometimes set in the middle of a line to indicate a paragraph break, followed by
[symbol] in the margin of the next line.</note>. Smaller capitals occur in the middle of lines in Codd. Bezae
and Marchalianus, of the sixth and seventh centuries respectively.
Moreover, all copies of whatever date are apt to crowd small
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
letters into the end of a line to save room, and if these small
letters preserve the form of the larger, it is reasonable to
conclude that the scribe is writing in a natural hand, not an
assumed one, and the argument for the antiquity of such a document,
derived from the shape of its letters, thus becomes all the
stronger. The continuous form of writing separate words must
have prevailed in manuscripts long after it was obsolete in
common life: Cod. Claromont., whose text is continuous even in
its Latin version, divides the words in the inscriptions and
subscriptions to the several books.
</p>

<p>
17. The stichometry of the sacred books has next to be
considered. The Greeks and Romans measured the contents of
their MSS. by lines, not only in poetry, but also artificially
in prose for a standard line of fifteen or sixteen syllables,
called by the earliest writers ἔπος, afterwards στίχος<note place='foot'>Many other examples of the use of στίχοι and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>versus</foreign> in this sense will be
found in that admirable monument of exact learning, now so little read, Prideaux
Connections, An. 446. Stichometry can be traced back to nearly a century before
Callimachus, who (<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 260) has been credited with the invention (Palaeography,
p. 79). The term στίχοι, like the Latin <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>versus</foreign>, originally referring whether to
rows of trees, or to the oars in the trireme (Virg. Aen. v. 119), would naturally
come to be applied to lines of poetry, and in this sense it is used by Pindar
(ἐπέων στίχες Pyth. iv. 100) and also by Theocritus (γράψον καὶ τόδε γράμμα, τό σοι
στίχοισι χαράξω Idyl, xxiii. 46), if the common reading be correct.</note>. Not
only do Athanasius [d. 373], Gregory Nyssen [d. 396], Epiphanius
[d. 403], and Chrysostom [d. 407] inform us that
in their time the Book of Psalms was already divided
into στίχοι, while Jerome [d. 420?] testifies the same for the
prophecies of Isaiah; but Origen also [d. 254] speaks of the
second and third Epistles of St. John as both of them not
exceeding one hundred στίχοι, of St. Paul's Epistles as consisting
of few, St. John's first Epistle as of very few (Euseb. Hist. Eccles.
vi. 25, cited by Tischendorf, Cod. Sinait., Proleg. p. xxi, note 2,
1863). Even the apocryphal letter of our Lord to Abgarus is
described as ὀλιγοστίχου μέν, πολυδυνάμου δὲ ἐπιστολῆς (Euseb.
H. E. i. 13): while Eustathius of Antioch in the fourth century
reckoned 135 στίχοι between John viii. 59 and x. 41. More
general is the use of the word in Ephraem the Syrian [d. 378],
Ὅταν δὲ ἀναγινώσκῃς, ἐπιμελῶς καὶ ἐμπόνως ἀναγίνωσκε, ἐν πολλῇ
καταστάσει διερχόμενος τὸν στίχον (tom. iii. 101). As regards the
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
Psalms, we may see their arrangement for ourselves in Codd.
Vaticanus and Sinaiticus, wherein, according to the true principles
of Hebrew poetry, the verses do not correspond in metre
or quantity of syllables, but in the parallelism or relationship
subsisting between the several members of the same sentence or
stanza<note place='foot'>That we have rightly understood Epiphanius' notion of the στίχοι is evident
from his own language respecting Psalm cxli. 1, wherein he prefers the addition
made by the Septuagint to the second clause, because by so doing its authors
ἀχώλωτον ἐποίησαν τὸν στίχον: so that the passage should run <q>O Lord, I cry
unto Thee, make haste unto me || Give ear to the voice of my request,</q> τῆς δεήσεώς
μου to complete the rhythm. This whole subject is admirably worked out in
Suicer, Thesaur. Eccles. tom. ii. pp. 1025-37.</note>. Such στίχοι were therefore not <q>space-lines,</q> but <q>sense-lines.</q>
It seems to have occurred to Euthalius, a deacon of
Alexandria, as it did long afterwards to Bishop Jebb when he
wrote his <q>Sacred Literature,</q> that a large portion of the New
Testament might be divided into στίχοι on the same principles:
and that even where that distribution should prove but artificial,
it would guide the public reader in the management of his voice,
and remove the necessity for an elaborate system of punctuation.
Such, therefore, we conceive to be the use and design of
stichometry, as applied to the Greek Testament by Euthalius<note place='foot'>In the Epistles of St. Paul, Euthalius seems to have followed a Syrian writer.
Gregory, Prolegomena, p. 113; Zacagnius, Collectanea Monumentorum Veterum
Ecclesiae, Rome, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1698, pp. 404, 409.</note>,
whose edition of the Acts and Epistles was published <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 490.
Who distributed the στίχοι of the Gospels (which are in truth
better suited for such a process than the Epistles) does not
appear. Although but few manuscripts now exist that are
written στοιχηδόν or στιχηρῶς (a plan which consumed too much
vellum to become general), we read in many copies, added usually
to the subscription at the foot of each of the books of the New
Testament, a calculation of the number of στίχοι it contained,
the numbers being sufficiently unlike to show that the arrangement
was not the same in all codices, yet near enough to prove
that they were divided on the same principle<note place='foot'>At the end of 2 Thess., in a hand which Tischendorf states to be very ancient,
but not that of the original scribe, the Codex Sinaiticus has στιχων ρπ [180; the
usual number is 106]: at the end of Rom., 1 Cor., 1 Thess., and the Catholic
Epistles, there is no such note; but in all the other Pauline Epistles the στίχοι
are numbered.</note>. In the few documents
written στιχηρῶς that survive, the length of the clauses is
very unequal; some (e.g. Cod. Bezae, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> the description below
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
and the facsimile, No. <ref target='Plate_XIV'>42</ref>) containing as much in a line as might
be conveniently read aloud in a breath, others (e.g. Cod. Laud. of
the Acts, Plate <ref target='Plate_X'>x</ref>. No. 25) having only one or two words in a line.
The Cod. Claromontanus (facsim. No. <ref target='Plate_XIV'>41</ref>) in this respect lies
between those extremes, and the fourth great example of this
class (Cod. Coislin. 202, H of St. Paul), of the sixth century, has
one of its few surviving pages (of sixteen lines each) arranged
<hi rend='italic'>literatim</hi> as follows (1 Cor. x. 22, &amp;c.): εσμεν | παντα μοι εξεστι |
αλλ ου παντα συμφερει | παντα μοι εξεστιν | αλλ ου παντα οικοδομει |
μηδεισ το εαυτου ζη | (<foreign rend='italic'>ob necessitatem spatii</foreign>) τειτω | αλλα το του
ετερου | παν το εν μακελλω πω | (<foreign rend='italic'>ob necessitatem</foreign>) λουμενον | εσθιετε
μηδεν ανα | κρινωντες δια την | συνειδησιν | του γαρ κυ η γη και
το πλη | ρωμα αυτης. Other manuscripts written στιχηρῶς are
Matthaei's V of the eighth century (though with verses like
ours more than with ordinary στίχοι), Bengel's Uffenbach 3 of
St. John (Evan. 101), Alter's Forlos. 29 (36 of the Apocalypse),
and, as it would seem, the Cod. Sangallensis Δ. In Cod.
Claromontanus there are scarcely any stops (the middle point
being chiefly reserved to follow abridgements or numerals), the
stichometry being of itself an elaborate scheme of punctuation;
but the longer στίχοι of Cod. Bezae are often divided by a single
point.
</p>

<p>
18. In using manuscripts of the Greek Testament, we must
carefully note whether a reading is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign> (*) or by some
subsequent corrector (**). It will often happen that these last
are utterly valueless, having been inserted even from printed
copies by a modern owner (like some marginal variations of the
Cod. Leicestrensis)<note place='foot'>So the margin of Gale's Evan. 66 contains readings cited by Mill and his
followers, which a hand of the sixteenth century took, some of them from the
Leicester manuscript, others from early editions.</note>, and such as these really ought not to have
been extracted by collators at all; while others by the second
hand are almost as weighty, for age and goodness, as the text
itself. All these points are explained by critical editors for each
document separately; in fact to discriminate the different corrections
in regard to their antiquity and importance is often the
most difficult portion of such editor's task (e.g. in Codd. Bezae
and Claromontanus), and one on which he often feels it hard to
satisfy his own judgement. Corrections by the original scribe, or
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
by a contemporary reviser, where they can be satisfactorily
distinguished, must be regarded as a portion of the testimony of
the manuscript itself, inasmuch as every carefully prepared copy
was reviewed and compared (ἀντεβλήθη), if not by the writer
himself, by a skilful person appointed for the task (ὁ διορθῶν,
ὁ διορθωτής), whose duty it was to amend manifest errors, sometimes
also to insert ornamental capitals in places which had been
reserved for them; in later times (and as some believe at a very
early period) to set in stops, breathings and accents; in copies
destined for ecclesiastical use to arrange the musical notes that
were to guide the intonation of the reader. Notices of this kind
of revision are sometimes met with at the end of the best
manuscripts. Such is the note in Cod. H of St. Paul: εγραψα
και εξεθεμην προσ το εν Καισαρια αντιγραφον τησ διδλιοθηκησ του
αγιου Παμφιλου, the same library of the Martyr Pamphilus to
which the scribe of the Cod. Frid.-August. resorted for his model<note place='foot'>The following subscription to the book of Ezra (and a very similar one
follows Esther) in the Cod. Frid.-August, (fol. 13. 1), though in a hand of the
seventh century, will show the care bestowed on the most ancient copies of the
Septuagint: Αντεβληθη προσ παλαιωτατον λιαν αντιγραφον δεδιορθωμενον χειρι του
αγιου μαρτυροσ Παμφιλου; ὁπερ αντιγραφον προσ τω τελει υποσημειωσισ τισ ϊδιοχειροσ
αυτου ϋπεκειτο εχουσα ουτωσ; μετελημφθη και διορθωθη προσ τα εξαπλα ωριγενουσ;
Αντωνινοσ αντεβαλεν; Παμφιλοσ διορθωσα. Tregelles suggests that the work of the
διορθωτὴς or <emph>corrector</emph> was probably of a critical character, the office of the ἀντιβάλλων
or <emph>comparer</emph> being rather to eliminate mere clerical errors (Treg. Horne's
Introd., vol. iv. p. 85). Compare Tischendorf, Cod. Sinait. Proleg. p. xxii.</note>;
and that in Birch's most valuable Urbino-Vatican. 2 (157 of the
Gospels), written for the Emperor John II (1118-1143), wherein
at the end of the first Gospel we read κατὰ Ματθαῖον ἐγράφη καὶ
ἀντεβλήθη ἐκ τῶν ἐν ἱεροσολύμοις παλαιῶν ἀντιγράφων τῶν ἐν ἁγίω
ὄρει [Athos] ἀποκειμένων: similar subscriptions are appended to
the other Gospels. See also Evan. Λ. 20, 164, 262, 300, 376;
Act. 15, 83, in the list of manuscripts below.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. Divisions Of The Text, And Other Particulars.</head>

<p>
We have next to give some account of ancient divisions of the
text, as found in manuscripts of the New Testament; and
these must be carefully noted by the student, since few copies are
without one or more of them.
</p>

<p>
1. So far as we know at present, the oldest sections still
extant are those of the Codex Vaticanus. These seem to have
been formed for the purpose of reference, and a new one always
commences where there is some break in the sense. Many,
however, at least in the Gospels, consist of but one of our modern
verses, and they are so unequal in length as to be rather inconvenient
for actual use. In the four Gospels only the marginal
numerals are in red, St. Matthew containing 170 of these divisions,
St. Mark 62, St. Luke 152, St. John 80. In the Acts of the
Apostles are two sets of sections, thirty-six longer and in an older
hand, sixty-nine smaller and more recent<note place='foot'><q>Simile aliquid invenitur in codice Arabico epp. Pauli anno 892, p. Chr.,
quem ex oriente Petropolin pertulimus.</q> Tischendorf, Cod. Vat. Prolog. p. xxx.
n. 3.</note>. Each of these also
begins after a break in the sense, but they are quite independent
of each other, as a larger section will sometimes commence in
the middle of a smaller, the latter being in no wise a subdivision
of the former. Thus the greater Γ opens Acts ii. 1, in the middle
of the lesser β, which extends from Acts i. 15 to ii. 4. The first
forty-two of the lesser chapters, down to Acts xv. 40, are found
also with slight variations in the margin of Codex Sinaiticus,
written by a very old hand. As in most manuscripts, so in Codex
Vaticanus, the Catholic Epistles follow the Acts, and in them
also and in St. Paul's Epistles there are two sets of sections, only
that in the Epistles the older sections are the more numerous.
The Pauline Epistles are reckoned throughout as one book in the
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
elder notation, with however this remarkable peculiarity, that
though in the Cod. Vatican. itself the Epistle to the Hebrews
stands next after the second to the Thessalonians, <emph>and on the
same leaf with it</emph>, the sections are arranged as if it stood between
the Epistles to the Galatians and Ephesians. For whereas that
to the Galatians ends with § 58, that to the Ephesians begins
with § 70, and the numbers proceed regularly down to § 93,
with which the second to the Thessalonians ends. The Epistle
to the Hebrews which then follows opens with § 59; the last
section extant (§ 64) begins at Heb. ix. 11, and the manuscript
ends abruptly at καθα ver. 14. It plainly appears, then, that the
sections of the Codex Vaticanus must have been copied from
some yet older document, in which the Epistle to the Hebrews
preceded that to the Ephesians. It will be found hereafter
(vol. ii) that in the Thebaic version the Epistle to the
Hebrews preceded that to the Galatians, instead of following it,
as here. For a list of the more modern divisions in the Epistles,
see the Table given below. The Vatican sections of the Gospels
have also been discovered by Tregelles in one other copy, the
palimpsest Codex Zacynthius of St. Luke (Ξ), which he published
in 1861.
</p>

<p>
2. Hardly less ancient, and indeed ascribed by some to
Tatian the Harmonist, the disciple of Justin Martyr, is the
division of the Gospels into larger chapters or κεφάλαια <foreign rend='italic'>majora</foreign><note place='foot'>Lat. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>breves</foreign>, or τίτλοι: but τίτλος means properly the brief summary of the
contents of a κεφάλαιον placed at the top or bottom of a page, or with the κεφάλαια
in a table to each Gospel. The κεφ. <foreign rend='italic'>minora</foreign> = Ammonian Sections.</note>.
It may be noticed that in none of the four Gospels does the first
chapter stand at its commencement. In St. Matthew chapter A
begins at chap. ii. verse 1, and has for its title περὶ τῶν μάγων: in
St. Mark at chap. i. ver. 23 περὶ τοῧ δαιμονιζομένου: in St. Luke
at chap. ii. ver. 1 περὶ τῆς ἀπογραφῆς: in St. John at chap. ii. ver. 1
περὶ τοῦ ἐν Κανᾶ γάμου. Mill accounts for this circumstance by
supposing that in the first copies the titles at the head of each
Gospel were reserved till last for more splendid illumination,
and were thus eventually forgotten (Proleg. N. T. § 355); Griesbach
holds, that the general inscriptions of each Gospel, Κατὰ
Ματθαῖον, Κατὰ Μάρκον, &amp;c., were regarded as the special titles of
the first chapters also. On either supposition, however, it would
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
be hard to explain how what was really the second chapter came
to be <emph>numbered</emph> as the first; and it is worth notice that the
same arrangement takes place in the κεφάλαια (though these are
of a later date) of all the other books of the New Testament
except the Acts, 2 Corinth., Ephes., 1 Thess., Hebrews, James,
1 and 2 Peter, 1 John, and the Apocalypse: e.g. the first chapter
of the Epistle to the Romans opens ch. i. ver. 18 Πρῶτον μετὰ τὸ
προοίμιον, περὶ κρίσεως τῆς κατὰ ἐθνῶν τῶν οὐ φυλασσόντων τὰ φυσικά.
But the fact is that this arrangement, strange as it may seem, is
conformable to the practice of the times when these divisions
were finally settled. Both in the Institutes and in the Digest of
Justinian the first paragraph is always cited as pr. (i.e. <foreign rend='italic'>principium</foreign>,
προοίμιον, <hi rend='italic'>Preface</hi>), and what we should regard as the
second paragraph is numbered as the first, and so on throughout
the whole work<note place='foot'>This full explanation of a seeming difficulty was communicated to me independently
by Mr. P. W. Pennefather of Dublin, and Mr. G. A. King of Oxford.</note>.
</p>

<p>
The τίτλοι in St. Matthew amount to sixty-eight, in St. Mark
to forty-eight, in St. Luke to eighty-three, in St. John to
eighteen. This mode of division, although not met with in
the Vatican and Sinaitic manuscripts, is found in the Codices
Alexandrinus and Ephraemi of the fifth century, and in the
Codex Nitriensis of the sixth, each of which has tables of
the τίτλοι prefixed to the several Gospels: but the Codices
Alexandrinus, Rossanensis, and Dublinensis of St. Matthew, and
that portion of the purple Cotton fragment which is in the
Vatican, exhibit them in their usual position, at the top and
bottom of the pages. Thus it appears that they were too
generally diffused in the fifth century not to have originated at
an earlier period; although we must concede that the κεφάλαιον
spoken of by Clement of Alexandria (Stromat. i) when quoting
Dan. xii. 12, or by Athanasius (contra Arium) on Act. ii, and
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Capitulum</foreign> mentioned by Tertullian (ad Uxorem ii. 2) in
reference to 1 Cor. vii. 12, contain no certain allusions to any
specific divisions of the sacred text, but only to the particular
paragraphs or passages in which their citations stand. Except
that the contrary habit has grown inveterate<note place='foot'>And this too in spite of the lexicographer Suidas: Τίτλος διαφέρει κεφαλαίου;
καὶ ὁ Ματθαῖος τίτλους ἔχει ξή, κεφάλαια δὲ τνέ. And of Suicer, s. v.</note>, it were much to be
desired that the term τίτλοι should be applied to these longer
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
divisions, at least in the Gospels; but since usage has affixed the
term κεφάλαια to the larger chapters and sections to the smaller,
and τίτλοι only to the subjects or headings of the former, it would
be useless to follow any other system of names.
</p>

<p>
3. The Ammonian Sections were not constructed, like
the Vatican divisions and the τίτλοι, for the purpose of easy
reference, or distributed like them according to the breaks in the
sense, but for a wholly different purpose. So far as we can
ascertain, the design of Tatian's Harmony was simply to present
to Christian readers a single connected history of our Lord, by
taking from the four Evangelists indifferently whatsoever best
suited his purpose<note place='foot'>Ὁ Τατιανός, συνάφειάν τινα καὶ συναγωγὴν οὐκ οἶδ᾽ ὅπως τῶν εὐαγγελίων συνθείς,
τὸ διὰ τεσσάρων τοῦτο προσωνόμασεν; ὃ καὶ παρά τισιν εἰσέτι νῦν φέρεται. Euseb. Hist.
Eccl. iv. 29.</note>. As this plan could scarcely be executed
without <emph>omitting</emph> some portions of the sacred text, it is not
surprising that Tatian, possibly without any evil intention,
should have incurred the grave charge of mutilating Holy
Scripture<note place='foot'>Ambros. in Prooem. Luc. seems to aim at Tatian when he says <q>Plerique
etiam ex quatuor Evangelii libris in unum ea quae venenatis putaverunt assertionibus
convenientia referserunt.</q> Eusebius H. E. iv. 29 charges him on report
with <emph>improving</emph> not the Gospels, but the Epistles: τοῦ δὲ ἀποστόλου φασὶ τολμῆσαί
τινας αὐτὸν μεταφράσαι φωνάς, ὡς ἐπιδιορφούμενον αὐτῶν τὴν τῆς φράσεως σύνταξιν.
Dr. Westcott's verdict is rather less favourable than might have been anticipated:
<q>The heretical character of the Diatessaron was not evident on the surface of it,
and consisted rather of faults of defect than of erroneous teaching</q> (History of
the Canon, p. 354). From the Armenian version of Ephraem the Syrian's
Exposition of Tatian's Harmony, printed in 1836, translated in 1841 by Aucher
of the Melchitarist Monastery at Venice, but buried until it was published with
notes by Moesinger in 1876, a flood of light is thrown upon this question, and it
is now clear <q>that Tatian habitually abridged the language of the passages which
he combined</q> (Hort, Gk. Test. Introduction, p. 283); and that apparently in
perfect good faith.</note>. A more scholar-like and useful attempt was subsequently
made by Ammonius of Alexandria, early in the third
century [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 220], who, by the side of St. Matthew's Gospel,
which he selected as his standard, arranged in parallel columns,
as it would seem, the corresponding passages of the other three
Evangelists, so as to exhibit them all at once to the reader's eye;
St. Matthew in his proper order, the rest as the necessity of
abiding by St. Matthew's order prescribed. This is the account
given by the celebrated Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea, the Church
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
historian, who in the fourth century, in his letter to Carpianus,
described his own most ingenious system of Harmony, as founded
on, or at least as suggested by, the labours of Ammonius<note place='foot'>Ἀμμώνιος μὲν ὁ Ἀλεξανδρεύς, πολλήν, ὡς εἰκός, φιλοπονίαν καὶ σπουδὴν εἰσαγηοχώς,
τὸ διὰ τεσσάρων ἡμῖν καταλέλοιπεν εὐαγγέλιον, τῷ κατὰ Ματθαῖον τὰς ὁμοφώνους τῶν
λοιπῶν εὐαγγελιστῶν περικοπὰς παραθείς, ὡς ἐξ ἀνάγκης συμβῆναι τὸν τῆς ἀκολουθίας
εἱρμὸν τῶν τριῶν διαφθαρῆναι, ὅσον ἐπὶ τῷ ὕφει τῆς ἀναγνώσεως. Ἵνα δὲ σωζομένου καὶ
τοῦ τῶν λοιπῶν δι᾽ ὅλου σώματός τε καὶ εἱρμοῦ, εἰδέναι ἔχοις τοὺς οἰκείους ἑκάστου
εὐαγγελιστοῦ τόπους, ἐν οἶς κατὰ τῶν αὐτῶν ἠνέχθησαν φιλαλήθως εἰπεῖν, ἐκ τοῦ πονήματος
τοῦ προειρημένου ἀνδρὸς εἰληφὼς ἀφορμάς (taking the hint from Ammonius'
as Dean Burgon rightly understands the expression), καθ᾽ ἑτέραν μέθοδον κανόνας
δέκα τὸν ἀριθμὸν διεχάραξά σοι τοὺς ὑποτεταγμένους. Epist. ad Carpian. initio.
I have thankfully availed myself on this subject of Burgon's elaborate studies in
The Last Twelve Verses of St. Mark, pp. 125-132; 295-312.</note>. It
has been generally thought that the κεφάλαια, of which St. Matthew
contains 355, St. Mark 236<note place='foot'>This is the number given for St. Mark by Suidas and Stephen. It is an
uncertain point: thirty-four manuscripts give 233, reckoning only to xvi. 8;
while thirty-six give 341. See Burgon Twelve Last Verses, p. 311.</note>, St. Luke 342, St. John 232,
in all 1165, were made by Ammonius for the purpose of his
work, and they have commonly received the name of the Ammonian
sections: but this opinion was called in question by
Bp. Lloyd (Nov. Test. Oxon. 1827, Monitum, pp. viii-xi), who
strongly urges that, in his Epistle to Carpianus, Eusebius not
only refrains from ascribing these numerical divisions to Ammonius
(whose labours in this particular, as once seemed the
case with Tatian's, must in that case be deemed to have perished
utterly), but he almost implies that they had their origin at the
same time with his own ten canons, with which they are so
intimately connected<note place='foot'>I subjoin Eusebius' own words (Epist. ad Carpian.) from which no one would
infer that the <emph>sections</emph> were not his, as well as the <emph>canons</emph>. Αὕτη μὲν οὖν ἡ τῶν
ὑποτεταγμένων κανόνων ὑπόθεσις; ἡ δὲ σαφὴς αὐτῶν διήγησις, ἔστιν ἤδε. Ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστῳ
τῶν τεσσάρων εὐαγγελίων ἀριθμός τις πρόκειται κατὰ μέρος, ἀρχόμενος ἀπὸ τοῦ πρώτου,
εἶτα δευτέρου, καὶ τρίτου, καὶ καθεξῆς προϊὼν δι᾽ ὅλου μέχρι τοῦ τέλους τοῦ βιβλίου [the
sections]. Καθ᾽ ἕκαστον δὲ ἀριθμὸν ὑποσημείωσις διὰ κινναβάρεως πρόκειται [the canons],
δηλοῦσα ἐν ποίῳ τῶν δέκα κανόνων κείμενος ὁ ἀριθμὸς τυγχάνει.</note>. That they were essential to Eusebius'
scheme is plain enough; their place in Ammonius' parallel
Harmony is not easily understood, unless indeed (what is
nowhere stated, but rather the contrary) he did not set the
passages from the other Gospels at full length by the side of
St. Matthew's, but only these numerical references to them<note place='foot'>Something of this kind, however, must be the plan adopted in Codex E
(see Plate <ref target='Plate_XI'>xi</ref>. No. 27) of the Gospels, as described by Tregelles, who himself
collated it. <q>[It has] the Ammonian sections; but instead of the Eusebian
canons there is a kind of harmony of the Gospels noted at the foot of each page,
by a reference to the parallel sections of the other Evangelists.</q> Horne's Introd.
vol. iv. p. 200. Yet the canons <emph>also</emph> stand in the margin of this copy under the
so-called Ammonian sections: only the <emph>table</emph> of Eusebian canons is wanting.
The same kind of harmony at the foot of the page appears in Cod. W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi> at Trinity
College, Cambridge, but in this latter the sections in the margin are not accompanied
by the canons. Tischendorf states that the same arrangement prevails
in the small fragment T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi> at St. Petersburg; Dean Burgon adds to the list Codd.
M. 262, 264 at Paris, and conceives that this method of harmonizing, which he
regards as far simpler than the tedious and cumbersome process of resorting to
the Eusebian canons (ubi supra, p. <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>), was in principle, though not in details,
derived to the Greek Church from early Syriac copies of the Gospels, some of
which still survive (p. <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>).</note>.
</p>

<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>

<p>
There is, however, one ground for hesitation before we ascribe
the sections, as well as the canons, to Eusebius; namely, that
not a few ancient manuscripts (e.g. Codd. FHY) contain the
former, while they omit the latter. Of palimpsests indeed it
might be said with reason, that the rough process which so
nearly obliterated the ink of the older writing, would completely
remove the coloured paint (κιννάβαρις, <foreign rend='italic'>vermilion</foreign>, prescribed by
Eusebius, though blue or green is occasionally found) in which
the canons were invariably noted; hence we need not wonder
at their absence from the Codices Ephraemi, Nitriensis (R),
Dublinensis (Z), Codd. IW<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi> of Tischendorf, and the Wolfenbüttel
fragments (PQ), in all which the sections are yet legible in ink.
The Codex Sinaiticus contains both; but Tischendorf decidedly
pronounces them to be in a later hand. In the Codex Bezae
too, as well as the Codex Cyprius (K), even the Ammonian
sections, without the canons, are by later hands, though the
latter has prefixed the list or table of the canons. Of the oldest
copies the Cod. Alex. (A), Tischendorf's Codd. W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>Θ, the Cotton
frag. (N), and Codd. Beratinus and Rossanensis alone contain
both the sections and the canons. Even in more modern cursive
books the latter are often deficient, though the former are
present. This peculiarity we have observed in Burney 23, in
the British Museum, of the twelfth century, although the Epistle
to Carpianus stands at the beginning; in a rather remarkable
copy of about the twelfth century, in the Cambridge University
Library (Mm. 6. 9, Scholz Evan. 440), in which, however, the
table of canons but not the Epistle to Carpianus precedes; in
the Gonville and Caius Gospels of the twelfth century (Evan. 59),
and in a manuscript of about the thirteenth century at Trinity
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
College, Cambridge (B. x. 17)<note place='foot'>To this list of manuscripts of the Gospels which have the Ammonian
sections without the Eusebian canons add Codd. 38, 54, 60, 68, 117; Brit. Mus.
Addit. 16184, 18211, 19389; Milan Ambros. M. 48 <hi rend='italic'>sup.</hi>; E. 63 <hi rend='italic'>sup.</hi>; Burdett-Coutts
I. 4; II. 18; 26<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>; III. 9. Now that attention has been specially directed to
the matter, it is remarkable how many copies have the Ammonian sections without
the corresponding Eusebian canons under them, sometimes even when (as in
Codd. 572, 595, 597) the letter to Carpianus and the Eusebian tables stand at the
beginning of the volume. To the list here given must now be added Codd. O,
Υ, 185, 187, 190, 193, 194, 207, 209, 214, 217, 367, 406, 409, 410, 414, 418, 419,
456, 457, 494, 497, 501, 503, 504, 506, 508, 518, 544, 548, 550, 555, 558, 559, 564,
573, 575, 584, 586, 591, 592, 601, 602, 620: in all seventy-one manuscripts.</note>. These facts certainly seem to
indicate that in the judgement of critics and transcribers, whatever
that judgement may be deemed worth, the Ammonian
sections had a previous existence to the Eusebian canons, as
well as served for an independent purpose<note place='foot'>No doubt they do serve, in the manuscripts which contain them and omit
the canons, for marks of reference, like in kind to our modern chapters and
verses; but in consequence of their having been constructed for a wholly different
purpose, they are so unequal in length (as Burgon sees very clearly,
pp. 297, 303), that they answer that end as ill as any the most arbitrary
divisions of the text well could do.</note>.
</p>

<p>
In his letter to Carpianus, their inventor clearly yet briefly
describes the purpose of his canons, ten in number. The first
contains a list of seventy-one places in which all the four
Evangelists have a narrative, discourse, or saying in common:
the second of 111 places in which the three Matthew, Mark,
Luke agree: the third of twenty-two places common to Matthew,
Luke, John: the fourth of twenty-six passages common to
Matthew, Mark, John: the fifth of eighty-two places in which
the two Matthew, Luke coincide: the sixth of forty-seven places
wherein Matthew, Mark agree: the seventh of seven places
common to Matthew and John: the eighth of fourteen places
common to Luke and Mark: the ninth of twenty-one places in
which Luke and John agree: the tenth of sixty-two passages of
Matthew, twenty-one of Mark, seventy-one of Luke, and ninety-seven
of John which have no parallels, but are peculiar to a
single Evangelist. Under each of the 1165 so-named Ammonian
sections, in its proper place in the margin of a manuscript, is
put in coloured ink the number of that Eusebian canon to
which it refers. On looking for that section in the proper table
or canon, there will also be found the parallel place or places in
the other Gospels, each indicated by its proper numeral, and so
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
readily searched out. A single example will serve to explain
our meaning. In the facsimile of the Cotton fragment (Plate <ref target='Plate_V'>v</ref>.
No. 14), in the margin of the passage (John xv. 20) we see
<hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ΡΛΘ</hi> over Γ, where ΡΑΘ (139) is the proper section of St. John, Γ (3)
the number of the canon. On searching the third Eusebian
table we read MT. [symbol], Λ. <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>νη</hi>, ΙΩ. <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ρλθ</hi> and thus we learn that the
first clause of John xv. 20 is parallel in sense to the ninetieth
([symbol]) section of St. Matthew (x. 24), and to the fifty-eighth (<hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>νη</hi>) of
St. Luke (vi. 40). The advantage of such a system of parallels
to the exact study of the Gospels is too evident to need
insisting on.
</p>

<p>
4. The Acts of the Apostles and the Epistles are also divided
into <emph>chapters</emph> (κεφάλαια), in design precisely the same as the
κεφάλαια or τίτλοι of the Gospels, and nearly like them in length.
Since there is no trace of these chapters in the two great
Codices Alexandrinus and Ephraemi, of the fifth century (which
yet exhibit the τίτλοι, the sections, and one of them the canons),
it seems reasonable to assume that they are of later date. They
are sometimes connected with the name of Euthalius, deacon of
Alexandria, afterwards Bishop of Sulci<note place='foot'>Sulci in Sardinia is the only Bishop's see of the name I can find in Carol.
a Sancto Paulo's Geographia Sacra (1703), or in Bingham's Antiquities, Bk. ix.
Chapp. II, VII. Horne and even Tregelles speak of Sulca in Egypt, but I have
searched in vain for any such town or see. Euthalius is called Bishop of Sulce
both in Wake 12 (infra, note 4), and in the title to his works as edited by
L. A. Zacagni (Collectanea Monument. Veter. Eccles. Graec. ac Latin., Rom.
1698, p. 402). But one of Zacagni's manuscripts reads Σούλκης once, and he
guesses Ψέλχη near Syene, which appears in no list of Episcopal sees.</note>, whom we have already
spoken of as the reputed author of Scriptural stichometry
(<hi rend='italic'>above</hi>, p. <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>). We learn, however, from Euthalius' own
Prologue to his edition of St. Paul's Epistles (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 458,) that the
<q>summary of the chapters</q> (and consequently the numbers of the
chapters themselves) was taken from the work of <q>one of our
wisest and pious fathers<note place='foot'>Καθ᾽ ἑκάστην ἐπιστολὴν προτάξομεν τὴν τῶν κεφαλαίων ἔκθεσιν, ἑνὶ τῶν σοφωτάτων
τινὶ καὶ φιλοχρίστων πατέρων ἡμῶν πεπονημένην.</note>,</q> i.e. some Bishop that he does not
wish to particularize, whom Mill (Proleg. N. T. § 907) conjectures
to be Theodore of Mopsuestia, who lay under the censure of the
Church. Soon after<note place='foot'>Αὐτίκα δῆτα is his own expression.</note> the publication of St. Paul's Epistles, on
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
the suggestion of one Athanasius, then a priest and afterwards
Patriarch of Alexandria, Euthalius put forth a similar edition of
the Acts and Catholic Epistles<note place='foot'>E.g. in Wake 12, of the eleventh century, at Christ Church, the title at the
head of the list of chapters in the Acts is as follows: Εὐθαλίου ἐπισκόπου Σουλκῆς
ἔκθεσις κεφαλαίων τῶν Πράξεων σταλῆσα (-εῖσα) πρὸς Ἀθανάσιον ἐπίσκοπον Ἀλεξανδρείας.</note>, also divided into chapters, with
a summary of contents at the head of each chapter. Even these
he is thought to have derived (at least in the Acts) from the
manuscript of Pamphilus the Martyr [d. 308], to whom the
same order of chapters is ascribed in a document published by
Montfaucon (Bibliotheca Coislin. p. 78); the rather as Euthalius
fairly professes to have compared his book in the Acts and
Catholic Epistles <q>with the copies in the library at Caesarea</q>
which once belonged to <q>Eusebius the friend of Pamphilus<note place='foot'>In Wake 12 certain of the longer κεφάλαια are subdivided into μερικαὶ
ὑποδιαιρέσεις in the Acts, 1 Peter, 1 John, Romans, 1, 2 Corinthians, Colossians,
2 Thessalonians, 1 Timothy, Hebrews only. For a similar subdivision in the
Gospels, see Evan. 443 in the list of cursive MSS. given below.</note>.</q>
The Apocalypse still remains. It was divided, about the end of
the fifth century, by Andreas, Archbishop of the Cappadocian
Caesarea, into twenty-four <emph>paragraphs</emph> (λόγοι), corresponding to
the number of the elders about the throne (Apoc. iv. 4); each
paragraph being subdivided into three <emph>chapters</emph> (κεφάλαια)<note place='foot'>Διὰ τὴν τριμερῆ τῶν εἴκοσι τεσσάρων πρεσβυτέρων ὑπόστασιν, σώματος καὶ ψυχῆς καὶ
πνεύματος. See Matthaei, N. T. Gr. et Lat. vii. 276, note 4.</note>. The
summaries which Andreas wrote of his seventy-two chapters
are still reprinted in Mill's and other large editions of the Greek
Testament.
</p>

<p>
5. To Euthalius has been also referred a division of the Acts
into sixteen lessons (ἀναγνώσεις) and of the Pauline Epistles
into thirty-one (see table on p. <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>); but these lessons are
quite different from the much shorter ones adopted by the
Greek Church. He is also said to have numbered in each Epistle
of St. Paul the quotations from the Old Testament<note place='foot'>Many manuscripts indicate passages of the Old Testament cited in the New
by placing &gt; (as in Codd. Vatican. W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d,</hi> &amp;c., but in Sinait. more rarely), or [symbol with two greater-than marks], or
some such mark in the margin before every line. Our quotation-marks are
probably derived from this sign, the angle being rounded into a curve. Compare
the use of [symbol like right double quotation mark] in the margin of the Greek Testament of Colinaeus, 1534, and
Stephen's editions of 1546, -49, -50, &amp;c. Evan. 348 and others have [symbol]. In Codd.
Bezae, as will appear hereafter, the words cited are merely thrown a letter or
two back in each line.</note>, which are
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
still noted in many of our manuscripts, and is the first known to
have used that reckoning of the στίχοι which was formerly
annexed we know not when to the Gospels and Epistles, as well
as to the Acts. Besides the division of the text into στίχοι or
<emph>lines</emph> (<hi rend='italic'>above</hi>, p. <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>) we find in the Gospels alone another division
into ῥήματα or ῥήσεις <q>sentences,</q> differing but little from the
στίχοι in number. Of these last the precise numbers vary in
different copies, though not considerably: whether that variation
arose from the circumstance that ancient numbers were represented
by letters and so easily became corrupted, or from
a different mode of arranging the στίχοι and ῥήματα adopted by
the various scribes.
</p>

<p>
6. It is proper to state that the <emph>subscriptions</emph> (ὑπογραφαί)
appended to St. Paul's Epistles in many manuscripts, and retained
even in the Authorized English version of the New Testament,
are also said to be the composition of Euthalius. In the best
copies they are somewhat shorter in form, but in any shape they
do no credit to the care or skill of their author, whoever he may
be. <q>Six of these subscriptions,</q> writes Paley in that masterpiece
of acute reasoning, the Horae Paulinae, <q>are false or improbable;</q>
that is, they are either absolutely contradicted by the contents of
the epistle [1 Cor., Galat., 1 Tim.], or are difficult to be reconciled
with them [1, 2 Thess., Tit.].
</p>

<p>
The <emph>subscriptions</emph> to the Gospels have not, we believe, been
assigned to any particular author, and being seldom found in
printed copies of the Greek Testament or in modern versions,
are little known to the general reader. In the earliest manuscripts
the subscriptions, as well as the <emph>titles</emph> of the books, were of the
simplest character. Κατὰ Μαθθαῖον, κατὰ Μάρκον, &amp;c. is all that
the Codd. Vaticanus and Sinaiticus have, whether at the beginning
or the end. Εὐαγγέλιον κατὰ Ματθαῖον is the subscription to
the first Gospel in the Codex Alexandrinus; εὐαγγέλιον κατὰ
Μάρκον is placed at the beginning of the second Gospel in the
same manuscript, and the self-same words at the end of it by
Codices Alex. and Ephraemi: in the Codex Bezae (in which
St. John stands second in order) we merely read εὐαγγέλιον κατὰ
Μαθθαῖον ἐτελέσθη, ἄρχεται εὐαγγέλιον κατὰ Ἰωάννην. The same is
the case throughout the New Testament. After a while the titles
become more elaborate, and the subscriptions afford more
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
information, the truth of which it would hardly be safe to vouch
for. The earliest worth notice are found in the Codex Cyprius
(K) of the eighth or ninth century, which, together with those of
several other copies, are given in Scholz's Prolegomena N. T.
vol. i. pp. xxix, xxx. <hi rend='italic'>ad fin. Matthaei</hi>: Τὸ κατὰ Ματθαῖον
εὐαγγέλιον ἐξεδόθη ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἐν ἱεροσολύμοις μετὰ χρόνους ἡ [ὀκτὼ]
τῆς τοῦ Χριστοῦ ἀναλήψεως. <hi rend='italic'>Ad fin. Marci</hi>: Τὸ κατὰ Μάρκον
εὐαγγέλιον ἐξεδόθη μετὰ χρόνους δέκα τῆς τοῦ Χριστοῦ ἀναλήψεως.
Those to the other two Gospels exactly resemble St. Mark's, that
of St. Luke however being dated fifteen, that of St. John thirty-two
years after our Lord's Ascension, periods in all probability
far too early to be correct.
</p>

<p>
7. The foreign matter so often inserted in later manuscripts
has more value for the antiquarian than for the critic. That
splendid copy of the Gospels Lambeth 1178, of the tenth or
eleventh century, contains more such than is often found, set off
by fine illuminations. At the end of each of the first three
Gospels (but not of the fourth) are several pages relating to them
extracted from Cosmas Indicopleustes, who made the voyage
which procured him his cognomen about <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 522; also some
iambic verses of no great excellence, as may well be supposed. In
golden letters we read: <hi rend='italic'>ad fin. Matth.</hi> ἰστέον ὅτι τὸ κατὰ Ματθαῖον
εὐαγγέλιον ἑβραΐδι διαλέκτωι γραφὲν ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ; ἐν ἱερουσαλὴμ ἐξεδόθη;
ἑρμηνεύθη δὲ ὑπὸ ἱωάννου; ἐξηγεῖται δὲ τὴν κατὰ ἄνθρωπον τοῦ χ<hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>υ</hi>
γένεσιν, καί ἐστιν ἀνθρωπόμορφον τοῦτο τὸ εὐαγγέλιον. The last clause
alludes to Apoc. iv. 7, wherein the four living creatures were
currently believed to be typical of the four Gospels<note place='foot'>The whole mystery is thus unfolded (apparently by Cosmas) in Lamb. 1178,
p. 159: Καὶ γὰρ τὰ χερουβὶμ τετραπρόσωπα; καὶ τὰ πρόσωπα αὐτῶν εἰκόνες τῆς
πραγματείας τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ Θεοῦ; τὸ γὰρ ὅμοιον λέοντι, τὸ ἔμπρακτον καὶ βασιλικὸν καὶ
ἡγεμονικὸν [John i. 1-3] χαρακτηρίζει; τὸ δὲ ὅμοιον μόσχωι, τὴν ἱερουργικὴν καὶ
ἱερατικὴν [Luke i. 8] ἐμφανίζει; τὸ δὲ ἀνθρωποειδές, τὴν σάρκωσιν [Matt. i. 18]
διαγράφει. τὸ δὲ ὅμοιον ἀετῶι, τὴν ἐπιφοίτησιν τοῦ ἁγίου πνεύματος [Mark i. 2]
ἐμφανίζει. More usually the lion is regarded as the emblem of St. Mark, the
eagle of St. John.</note>. <hi rend='italic'>Ad fin.
Marc.</hi> ἰστέον ὅτι τὸ κατὰ Μάρκον εὐαγγέλιον ὑπηγορεύθη ὑπὸ Πέτρου
ἐν ῥώμηι; ἐποιήσατο δὲ τὴν ἀρχὴν ἀπὸ τοῦ προφητικοῦ λόγου τοῦ ἐξ
ὕψους ἐπιόντος τοῦ Ἡσαΐου; τὴν πτερωτικὴν εἰκόνα τοῦ εὐαγγελίου
δεικνύς. <hi rend='italic'>Ad fin. Luc.</hi> ἰστέον ὅτι τὸ κατὰ Λουκᾶν εὐαγγέλιον ὑπηγορεύθη
ὑπὸ Παύλου ἐν ῥώμηι; ἅτε δὲ ἱερατικοῦ χαρακτῆρος ὑπάρχοντος
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
ἀπὸ Ζαχαρίου τοῦ ἱερέως θυμιῶντος ἤρξατο. The reader will desire
no more of this.
</p>

<p>
8. The oldest manuscript known to be accompanied by
a <emph>catena</emph> (or continuous commentary by different authors) is the
palimpsest Codex Zacynthius (Ξ of Tregelles), an uncial of the
eighth century. Such books are not common, but there is a very
full commentary in minute letters, surrounding the large text
in a noble copy of the Gospels, of the twelfth century, which
belonged to the late Sir Thomas Phillipps (Middle Hill 13975,
since removed to Cheltenham), yet uncollated; another of St.
Paul's Epistles (No. 27) belongs to the University Library at
Cambridge (Ff. 1. 30). The Apocalypse is often attended with
the exposition of Andreas (p. 64), or of Arethas, also Archbishop
of the Cappadocian Caesarea in the tenth century, or (what is
more usual) with a sort of epitome of the two (e.g. Parham
No. 17), above, below, and in the margin beside the text, in
much smaller characters. In <emph>cursive</emph> manuscripts only the subject
(ὑπόθεσις), especially that written by Oecumenius in the tenth
century, sometimes stands as a <emph>Prologue</emph> before each book, but
not so often before the Gospels or Apocalypse as the Acts and
Epistles. Before the Acts we occasionally meet with Euthalius'
Chronology of St. Paul's Travels, or another Ἀποδημία Παύλου.
The Leicester manuscript contains between the Pauline Epistles
and the Acts (1) An Exposition of the Creed and statement of
the errors condemned by the seven general Councils, ending with
the second at Nice. (2) Lives of the Apostles, followed by an
exact description of the limits of the five Patriarchates. The
Christ Church copy Wake 12 also has after the Apocalypse some
seven or eight pages of a Treatise Περὶ τῶν ἁγίων καὶ οἰκουμενικῶν
<hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ζ</hi> συνόδων, including some notice περὶ τοπικῶν συνόδων. Similar
treatises may be more frequent in manuscripts of the Greek
Testament than we are at present aware of.
</p>

<table rend='latexcolumns: "p{1.0cm} p{1.0cm} p{0.9cm} p{1.2cm} p{0.9cm} p{0.9cm} p{0.9cm}";
       tblcolumns: "lw(7) r r r r r r"'>
<row><cell></cell><cell>Vatican MS. Older Sections</cell><cell>τίτλοι</cell>
     <cell>κεφάλαια Ammon</cell><cell>στίχοι</cell><cell>ῥήματα</cell><cell>Modern chap</cell></row>
<row><cell>Matthew</cell><cell>170</cell><cell>68</cell><cell>355</cell><cell>2560</cell>
     <cell>2522</cell><cell>28</cell></row>
<row><cell>Mark</cell><cell>62</cell><cell>48</cell><cell>236</cell><cell>1616</cell>
     <cell>1675</cell><cell>16</cell></row>
<row><cell>Luke</cell><cell>152</cell><cell>83</cell><cell>342</cell><cell>2740</cell>
     <cell>3803</cell><cell>24</cell></row>
<row><cell>John</cell><cell>80</cell><cell>18</cell><cell>232</cell><cell>2024</cell>
     <cell>1938</cell><cell>21</cell></row>
</table>

<table rend='latexcolumns: "p{1.0cm} p{1.0cm} p{1.0cm} p{1.0cm} p{1.0cm} p{1.0cm} p{1.0cm} ";
       tblcolumns: "lw(7) r r r r r r "'>
<row><cell></cell><cell>Vatican MS. Older Sections</cell><cell>Vatican MS. Later Sections</cell>
     <cell>Euthal. κεφ λ.</cell>
     <cell>στίχοι<note place='foot'>N. B. The στίχοι of the Acts and of all the Epistles except Hebr. are taken from
the Codex Passionei (G or L), an uncial of the ninth century.</note></cell><cell>Modern chapters</cell>
     <cell>Modern verses</cell></row>
<row><cell>Acts</cell><cell>36</cell><cell>69</cell><cell>40</cell><cell>2524</cell>
     <cell>28</cell><cell>1007</cell></row>
<row><cell>James</cell><cell>9</cell><cell>5</cell><cell>6</cell><cell>242</cell>
     <cell>5</cell><cell>108</cell></row>
<row><cell>1 Peter</cell><cell>8</cell><cell>3</cell><cell>8</cell><cell>236</cell>
     <cell>5</cell><cell>105</cell></row>
<row><cell>2 Peter</cell><cell>desunt</cell><cell>2</cell><cell>4</cell><cell>154</cell>
     <cell>3</cell><cell>61</cell></row>
<row><cell>1 John</cell><cell>14</cell><cell>3</cell><cell>7</cell><cell>274</cell>
     <cell>5</cell><cell>105</cell></row>
<row><cell>2 John</cell><cell>1</cell><cell>2</cell><cell>2</cell><cell>30</cell>
     <cell>1</cell><cell>13</cell></row>
<row><cell>3 John</cell><cell>2</cell><cell>desunt</cell><cell>3</cell><cell>32</cell>
     <cell>1</cell><cell>15</cell></row>
<row><cell>Jude</cell><cell>2</cell><cell>desunt</cell><cell>4</cell><cell>68</cell>
     <cell>1</cell><cell>25</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
In Vatican MS. older sections, there are 93 sections in Rom. 1, 2 Corinth. Gal. Eph.
Coloss. 1, 2 Thess. to Hebr. ix. 14.
</p>

<table rend='latexcolumns: "p{1.1cm} p{1.1cm} p{1.1cm} p{1.1cm} p{1.1cm} p{1.1cm}";
       tblcolumns: "lw(8) r r r r r"'>
<row><cell></cell><cell>Vatican MS. Later Sections</cell>
     <cell>Euthal. κεφ λ.</cell>
     <cell>στίχοι</cell><cell>Modern chapters</cell>
     <cell>Modern verses</cell></row>
<row><cell>Romans</cell><cell>8</cell><cell>19</cell><cell>920</cell>
     <cell>16</cell><cell>433</cell></row>
<row><cell>1 Corinth</cell><cell>10</cell><cell>9</cell><cell>870</cell>
     <cell>16</cell><cell>437</cell></row>
<row><cell>2 Corinth</cell><cell>9</cell><cell>11</cell><cell>590</cell>
     <cell>13</cell><cell>256</cell></row>
<row><cell>Galat</cell><cell>3</cell><cell>12</cell><cell>293</cell>
     <cell>6</cell><cell>149</cell></row>
<row><cell>Ephes</cell><cell>3</cell><cell>10</cell><cell>312</cell>
     <cell>6</cell><cell>155</cell></row>
<row><cell>Philipp</cell><cell>2</cell><cell>7</cell><cell>208</cell>
     <cell>4</cell><cell>104</cell></row>
<row><cell>Coloss</cell><cell>3</cell><cell>10</cell><cell>208</cell>
     <cell>4</cell><cell>95</cell></row>
<row><cell>1 Thess</cell><cell>2</cell><cell>7</cell><cell>193</cell>
     <cell>5</cell><cell>89</cell></row>
<row><cell>2 Thess</cell><cell>2</cell><cell>6</cell><cell>106</cell>
     <cell>3</cell><cell>47</cell></row>
<row><cell>1 Tim</cell><cell></cell><cell>18</cell><cell>230</cell>
     <cell>6</cell><cell>113</cell></row>
<row><cell>2 Tim</cell><cell></cell><cell>9</cell><cell>172</cell>
     <cell>4</cell><cell>83</cell></row>
<row><cell>Titus</cell><cell></cell><cell>6</cell><cell></cell>
     <cell>3</cell><cell>46</cell></row>
<row><cell>Philem</cell><cell></cell><cell>2</cell><cell>38</cell>
     <cell>1</cell><cell>25</cell></row>
<row><cell>Hebrews</cell><cell>5 to ch. ix. 11</cell><cell>22</cell><cell>703</cell>
     <cell>13</cell><cell>303</cell></row>
<row><cell>Apocalypse</cell><cell></cell><cell>72</cell><cell>1800</cell>
     <cell>22</cell><cell>405</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
9. We have not thought it needful to insert in this place
either a list of the τίτλοι of the Gospels, or of the κεφάλαια of
the rest of the New Testament, or the tables of the Eusebian
canons, inasmuch as they are all accessible in such ordinary
books as Stephen's Greek Testament 1550 and Mill's of 1707,
1710. The Eusebian canons are given in Bishop Lloyd's Oxford
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
Greek Test. of 1827 &amp;c. and in Tischendorf's of 1859. We
exhibit, however, for the sake of comparison, a tabular view of
<q>Ancient and Modern Divisions of the New Testament.</q> The
numbers of the ῥήματα and στίχοι in the Gospels are derived
from the most approved sources, but a synopsis of the variations
of manuscripts in this respect has been drawn up by Scholz,
Prolegomena N. T. vol. i. Cap. v, pp. xxviii, xxix<note place='foot'><p>The numbers of the Gospel στίχοι in our Table are taken from the uncial
copies Codd. GS and twenty-seven cursives named by Scholz: those of the ῥήματα
from Codd. 9, 13, 124 and seven others. In the ῥήματα he cites no other variation
than that Cod. 339 has 2822 for St. Matthew: but Mill states that Cod. 48
(Bodl. 7) has 1676 for Mark, 2507 for Luke (Proleg. N. T. § 1429). In Cod. 56
(Lincoln Coll.) the ἀναγνώσματα of St. Matthew are 127, of St. Mark 74, of St. Luke
130 (Mill).
</p>
<p>
In the στίχοι, a few straggling manuscripts fluctuate between 3897? and 1474
for Matthew; 2006 and 1000 for Mark; 3827 and 2000 for Luke; 2300 and 1300
for John. But the great mass of authorities stand as we have represented.</p></note>. A computation
of their number, as also of that of the ἀναγνώσματα, is often
given in the subscription at the end of a book.
</p>

<p>
10. On the divisions into chapters and verses prevailing in
our modern Bibles we need not dwell long. For many centuries
the Latin Church used the Greek τίτλοι (which they called
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>breves</foreign>) with the Euthalian κεφάλαια, and some of their copies
even retained the calculation by στίχοι: but about <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1248
Cardinal Hugo de Sancto Caro, while preparing a Concordance,
or index of declinable words, for the <emph>whole Bible</emph>, divided it into
its present chapters, subdividing them in turn into several parts
by placing the letters A, B, C, D &amp;c. in the margin, at equal
distances from each other, as we still see in many old printed
books, e.g. Stephen's N. T. of 1550. Cardinal Hugo's divisions,
unless indeed he merely adopted them from Lanfranc or some
other scholar, such as was very probably Stephen Langton the
celebrated Archbishop of Canterbury, soon took possession of
copies of the Latin Vulgate; they gradually obtained a place
in later Greek manuscripts, especially those written in the West
of Europe, and are found in the earliest printed and all later
editions of the Greek Testament, though still unknown to the
Eastern Church. They certainly possess no strong claim on our
preference, although they cannot now be superseded. The
chapters are inconveniently and capriciously unequal in length;
occasionally too they are distributed with much lack of judgement.
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
Thus Matt. xv. 39 belongs to ch. xvi, and perhaps
ch. xix. 30 to ch. xx; Mark ix. 1 properly appertains to the
preceding chapter; Luke xxi. 1-4 had better be united with
ch. xx, as in Mark xii. 41-44; Acts v might as well commence
with Acts iv. 32; Acts viii. 1 (or at least its first clause) should
not have been separated from ch. vii; Acts xxi concludes with
strange abruptness. Bp. Terrot (on Ernesti's Institutes, vol. ii.
p. 21) rightly affixes 1 Cor. iv. 1-5 to ch. iii. Add that 1 Cor.
xi. 1 belongs to ch. x; 2 Cor. iv. 18 and vi. 18 to ch. v and
ch. vii respectively: Col. iv. 1 must clearly go with ch. iii.
</p>

<p>
In commendation of the modern verses still less can be said.
As they are stated to have been constructed after the model of
the ancient στίχοι (called <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>versus</foreign></q> in the Latin manuscripts),
we have placed in the Table the exact number of each for every
book in the New Testament. Of the στίχοι we reckon 19241 in
all, of the modern verses 7959<note place='foot'>Our English version divides 2 Cor. xiii. 12 of the Greek into two, and unites
John i. 38, 39 of the Greek. The English and Greek verses begin differently in
Luke i. 73, 74; vii. 18, 19. Acts ix. 28, 29; xi. 25, 26; xiii. 32, 33; xix. 40, 41;
xxiv. 2, 3. 2 Cor. ii. 12, 13; v. 14, 15; xi. 8, 9. Eph. i. 10, 11; iii. 17, 18.
Phil. iii. 13, 14. 1 Thess. ii. 11, 12. Heb. vii. 20, 21; x. 22, 23. 1 Jo. ii. 13,14.
3 Jo. 14, 15. Apoc. xii. 18 or xiii. 1; xviii. 16, 17. In a few of these places
editions of the Greek vary a little. The whole subject of the verses is discussed
in Dr. Ezra Abbot's tract <q>De Editionibus Novi Testamenti Graece in versuum
quos dicunt distinctione inter se discrepantibus</q> 1882, included in the Prolegomena
for Tischendorf's N. T., eighth edition, pp. 167, &amp;c.</note>, so that on the average (for we
have seen that the manuscript variations in the number of στίχοι
are but inconsiderable) we may calculate about five στίχοι to
every two modern verses. The fact is that some such division is,
simply indispensable to every accurate reader of Scripture; and
Cardinal Hugo's divisions by letters of the alphabet, as well as
those adopted by Sanctes Pagninus in his Latin version of the
whole Bible (1528), having proved inconveniently large, Robert
Stephen, the justly celebrated printer and editor of the Greek
Testament, undertook to form a system of verse-divisions, taking
for his model the short verses into which the Hebrew Bible had
already been divided, as it would seem by Rabbi Nathan, in the
preceding century. We are told by Henry Stephen (Praef.
Concordantiae) that his father Robert executed this design on
a journey from Paris to Lyons <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>inter equitandum</foreign><note place='foot'><q>I think it would have been better done on one's knees in the closet,</q> is
Mr. Kelly's quaint and not unfair comment (Lectures on the Minor Prophets,
p. 324), unless, as is not unlikely, he copied what was done before.</note>;</q> that is, we
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
presume, while resting at the inns on the road. Certain it is
that, although every such division must be in some measure
arbitrary, a very little care would have spared us many of the
disadvantages attending that which Robert Stephen first published
at Geneva in his Greek Testament of 1551, from which
it was introduced into the text of the Genevan English Testament
of 1557, into Beza's Greek Testament of 1565, and thence
into subsequent editions. It is now too late to correct the
errors of the verse-divisions, but they can be neutralized, at
least in a great degree, by the plan adopted by modern critics,
of banishing both the verses and the chapters into the margin,
and breaking the text into paragraphs, better suited to the
sense. The <foreign rend='italic'>pericopae</foreign> or sections of Bengel<note place='foot'>Novum Testamentum Graecum. Edente Jo. Alberto Bengelio. Tubingae
1734. 4to. The practice of the oldest Greek manuscripts in regard to paragraphs
has been stated above (p. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, note 2), and will be further explained in the next
section under our descriptions of Codd. אBD.</note> (whose labours
will be described in their proper place) have been received with
general approbation, and adopted, with some modification, by
several recent editors. Much pains were bestowed on their
arrangement of the paragraphs by the Revisers of the English
version of 1881.
</p>

<p>
11. We now come to the <emph>contents</emph> of manuscripts of the Greek
Testament, and must distinguish regular copies of the sacred
volume or of parts of it from Lectionaries, or Church-lesson
books, containing only extracts, arranged in the order of Divine
Service daily throughout the year. The latter we will consider
presently: with regard to the former it is right to bear in mind,
that comparatively few copies of the whole New Testament
remain; the usual practice being to write the four Gospels in
one volume, the Acts and Epistles in another: manuscripts of
the Apocalypse, which was little used for public worship, being
much rarer than those of the other books. Occasionally the
Gospels, Acts, and Epistles form a single volume; sometimes
the Apocalypse is added to other books; as to the Pauline
Epistles in Lambeth 1186, or even to the Gospels, in a later hand
(e.g. Cambridge University Libr. Dd. 9. 69: Gospels No. 60,
<emph>dated</emph> <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1297). The Apocalypse, being a short work, is often
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
found bound up in volumes containing very miscellaneous matter
(e.g. Vatican. 2066 or B; Brit. Mus. Harleian. 5678, No. 31; and
Oxon. Barocc. 48, No. 28). The Codex Sinaiticus of Tischendorf
is the more precious, in that it happily exhibits the whole New
Testament complete: so would also the Codices Alexandrinus and
Ephraemi, but that they are sadly mutilated: no other uncial
copies have this advantage, and very few cursives. In England
only five such are known, the great Codex Leicestrensis, which
is imperfect at the beginning and end; Butler 2 (Evan. 201)
Additional 11837, dated <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1357, and (Evan. 584) Additional
17469, both in the British Museum; Canonici 34 (Evan. 488) in
the Bodleian, dated <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1515-16. Additional MS. 28815 (Evan.
603, and Paul 266, and Apoc. 89) in the British Museum and
B-C. <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> 4 at Sir Roger Cholmely's School, Highgate, are
separated portions of one complete copy. The Apocalypse in
the well-known Codex Montfortianus at Dublin is usually considered
to be by a later hand. Besides these Scholz enumerates
only nineteen foreign copies of the whole New Testament<note place='foot'>Coislin. 199 (Evan. 85); Vatic. 2080 (Evan. 175); Palat. Vat. 171 (Evan.
149); Lambec. 1 at Vienna (Evan. 218); Vatic. 1160 (Evan. 141); Venet. 5
(Evan. 205); its alleged duplicate Venet. 10 (Evan. 209); Matthaei k (Evan. 241);
Moscow Synod. 380 (Evan. 242); Paris, Reg. 47 (Evan. 18); Reg. 61 (Evan. 263);
Vat. Ottob. 66 (Evan. 386); Vat. Ottob. 381 (Evan. 390); Taurin. 302 (Evan. 339);
S. Saba, 10 and 20 (Evan. 462 and 466); Laurent. 53 (Evan. 367); Vallicel. F. 17
(Evan. 394); Phillipps 7682 (Evan. 531); perhaps Scholz ought to have added
Venet. 6 (Evan. 206) which he states to contain the whole New Testament,
Proleg. N. T. vol. i. p. lxxii. In Evan. 180 all except the Gospels are by a later
hand. Add (Evan. 622) also copies at Poictiers, Ferrara, and Toledo. Lagarde
(Genesis, pp. 7, 8) describes another copy at Zittau, collated by Matthaei in
1801-2, apparently unpublished.</note>;
making but twenty-four in all, as far as was then known, out
of the vast mass of extant documents.
</p>

<p>
12. Whether copies contain the whole or a part of the
sacred volume, the general <emph>order</emph> of the books is the following:
Gospels, Acts, Catholic Epistles, Pauline Epistles, Apocalypse.
A solitary manuscript of the fifteenth century (Venet. 10, Evan.
209) places the Gospels between the Pauline Epistles and the
Apocalypse<note place='foot'>I presume that the same order is found in Evan. 393, whereof Scholz states
<q>sec. xvi. continet epist. cath. paul. ev.</q> Proleg. N. T. vol. i. p. xc.</note>; in the Codices Sinaiticus, Leicestrensis, Fabri
(Evan. 90), and Montfortianus, as in the Bodleian Canonici 34,
the copy in the King's Library Brit. Mus. (Act. 20), and the
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
Complutensian edition (1514), the Pauline Epistles precede the
Acts. The Pauline Epistles stand between the Acts and the
Catholic Epistles in Phillipps 1284, Evan. 527; Parham 71. 6,
Evan. 534; Upsal, Sparfwenfeldt 42, Acts 68; Paris Reg. 102 A,
Acts 119; Reg. 103 A, Acts 120. In Oxford Bodl. Miscell. 74
the order is Acts, Cath. Epp., Apocalypse, Paul. Epp., but an
earlier hand wrote from 3 John onwards. In Evan. 51 Dr. C. R.
Gregory points out minute indications that the scribe, not the
binder, set the Gospels last. In the Memphitic and Thebaic the
Acts follow the Catholic Epistles (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> below, vol. ii, chap. iii). The
Codex Basiliensis (No. 4 of the Epistles), Acts Cod. 134, Brit.
Mus. Addl. 19388, Lambeth 1182, 1183, and Burdett-Coutts III. 1,
have the Pauline Epistles immediately after the Acts and before
the Catholic Epistles, as in our present Bibles. Scholz's Evan.
368 stands thus, St. John's Gospel, Apocalypse, then all the
Epistles; in Havniens. 1 (Cod. 234 of the Gospels, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1278)
the order appears to be Acts, Paul. Ep., Cath. Ep., Gospels; in
Ambros. Z 34 <hi rend='italic'>sup.</hi> at Milan, Dean Burgon testifies that the
Catholic and Pauline Epistles are followed by the Gospels; in
Basil. B. vi. 27 or Cod. 1, the Gospels have been bound after the
Acts and Epistles; while in Evan. 175 the Apocalypse stands
between the Acts and Catholic Epistles; in Evan. 51 the binder
has set the Gospels last: these, however, are mere accidental
exceptions to the prevailing rule<note place='foot'>Hartwell Horne in the second volume of his Introduction tells us that in
some of the few manuscripts which contain the whole of the New Testament the
books are arranged thus: Gospels, Acts, Catholic Epistles, Apocalypse, Pauline
Epistles (p. 92, ed. 1834). This statement may be true of some of the foreign
MSS. named in p. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> note, but of the English it can refer to none, although
Wake 34 at Christ Church commences with the Acts and Catholic Epistles,
followed by the Apocalypse beginning on the same page as Jude ends, and the
Pauline Epistles on the same page as the Apocalypse ends. The Gospels, which
come last, may have been misplaced by an early binder.</note>. The four Gospels are almost
invariably found in their familiar order, although in the Codex
Bezae (as we partly saw above, p. <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>) they stand Matthew,
John, Luke, Mark<note place='foot'>This is the true <emph>Western</emph> order (Scrivener, Cod. Bezae, Introd. p. xxx and
note), and will be found in the copies of the Old Latin <hi rend='italic'>a</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: sub'>1</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>a</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: sub'>2</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>b</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>e</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>f</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: sub'>1</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>ff</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: sub'>2</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>i</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>n</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>g</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>r</hi>
to be described in vol. ii, and in the Gothic version. In Burdett-Coutts II. 7,
p. 4, also, prefixed to the Gospels, we read the following rubric-title to certain
verses of Gregory Nazianzen: <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>χυ</hi> θαύματα; παρὰ ματθαίω ῒωάννῃ τὲ καὶ λουκᾶ καὶ
μάρκω; κ.τ.λ.</note>; in the Codex Monacensis (X) John, Luke,
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
Mark, Matthew (but two leaves of Matthew <emph>also</emph> stand before
John), also in the Latin <hi rend='italic'>k</hi>; in Cod. 90 (Fabri) John, Luke,
Matthew, Mark; in Cod. 399 at Turin John, Luke, Matthew,
an arrangement which Dr. Hort refers to the Commentary of
Titus of Bostra on St. Luke which accompanies it; in the
Curetonian Syriac version Matthew, Mark, John, Luke. In
the Pauline Epistles that to the Hebrews immediately follows
the second to the Thessalonians in the four great Codices
Vaticanus, Sinaiticus, Alexandrinus, and Ephraemi<note place='foot'>Tischendorf cites the following copies in which the Epistle to the Hebrews
stands in the same order as in Codd. אABC, <q>H [Coislin. 202], 17, 23, 47, 57,
71, 73 aliique.</q> Add 77, 80, 166, 189, 196, 264, 265, 266 (Burdett-Coutts <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> 4).
So in Zoega's Thebaic version. Epiphanius (adv. Haer. i. 42) says: ἄλλα δὲ ἀντίγραφα
ἔχει τὴν πρὸς ἑβραίους δεκάτην, πρὸ τῶν δύο τῶν πρὸς Τιμόθεον καὶ Τίτον. So
Paul 166, 281, and also Bp. Lightfoot's MSS. of the Memphitic except 7 and 16.
In the Thebaic it follows 2 Cor. See below.</note>: in the
copy from which the Cod. Vatican. was taken the Hebrews
followed the Galatians (<hi rend='italic'>above</hi>, p. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>). The Codex Claromontanus,
the document next in importance to these four, sets
the Colossians appropriately enough next to its kindred and
contemporaneous Epistle to the Ephesians, but postpones that
to the Hebrews to Philemon, as in our present Bibles: an
arrangement which at first, no doubt, originated in the early
scruples prevailing in the Western Church, with respect to the
authorship and canonical authority of that divine epistle.
</p>

<p>
13. We must now describe the <emph>Lectionaries</emph> or Service-books
of the Greek Church, in which the portions of Scripture publicly
read throughout the year are set down in chronological order,
without regard to their actual places in the sacred volume. In
length and general arrangement they resemble not so much the
Lessons as the Epistles and Gospels in our English Book of
Common Prayer, only that every day in the year has its own
proper portion, and the numerous Saints' days independent
services of their own. These Lectionaries consist either of
lessons from the Gospels, and are then called <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Evangelistaria</foreign> or
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Evangeliaria</foreign> (εὐαγγελιστάρια)<note place='foot'>They are also termed Εὐαγγέλια&mdash;evidently a popular, as well as a misleading
name.</note>; or from the Acts and Epistles;
termed <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Praxapostolos</foreign> (πραξαπόστολος) or <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Apostolos</foreign><note place='foot'>Suicer, s. v.</note>: the general
name of Lectionary is often, though incorrectly, confined to the
latter class. A few books called ἀποστολοευαγγέλια have lessons
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
taken both from the Gospels and the Apostolic writings. In
<foreign rend='italic'>Euchologies</foreign>, or Books of Offices, wherein both the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Apostolos</foreign> and
the <emph>Gospels</emph> are found, the former always precede in each Office,
just as the Epistle precedes the Gospel in the Service-books of
Western Christendom. The peculiar arrangement of Lectionaries
renders them very unfit for the hasty, partial, cursory collation
which has befallen too many manuscripts of the other class, and
this circumstance, joined with the irksomeness of using Service-books
never familiar to the habits even of scholars in this part
of Europe, has caused these documents to be so little consulted,
that the contents of the very best and oldest among them have
until recently been little known. Matthaei, of whose elaborate
and important edition of the Greek Testament (12 tom. Riga
1782-88) we shall give an account hereafter, has done excellent
service in this department; two of his best copies, the uncials
B and H (Nos. 47, 50), being Evangelistaria. The present
writer also has collated three noble uncials of the same rank,
Arundel 547 being of the ninth century, Parham 18 bearing date
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 980, Harleian 5598, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 995. Not a few other uncial
Lectionaries remain quite neglected, for though none of them
perhaps are older than the eighth century, the ancient character
was retained for these costly and splendid Service-books till
about the eleventh century (Montfaucon, Palaeogr. Graec. p. 260),
before which time the cursive hand was generally used in other
Biblical manuscripts. There is, of course, no place in a Lectionary
for divisions by κεφάλαια, for the so-called Ammonian sections,
or for the canons of Eusebius.
</p>

<p>
The division of the New Testament into Church-lessons was,
however, of far more remote antiquity than the employment of
separate volumes to contain them. Towards the end of the
fourth century, that golden age of Patristic theology, Chrysostom
recognizes some stated order of the lessons as familiar to all his
hearers, for he exhorts them to peruse and mark beforehand the
passages (περικοπαί<note place='foot'>This was the word for a lection or lesson, and Suicer tells us that ἀνάγνωσις
and ἀνάγνωσμα were employed as equivalents. But in modern textual criticism,
ἀναγνώσματα is used to signify the marks indicating lections, which are found in
the margin or at the head or foot of pages, or the computation of their number
which is often appended at the end of a book. See pp. <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, note 1, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>.</note>) of the Gospels which were to be publicly
read to them the ensuing Sunday or Saturday<note place='foot'>Chrysost. in Joan. Hom. x κατὰ μίαν σαββάτων ἢ καὶ κατὰ σάββατον. Traces
of these Church-lessons occur in manuscripts as early as the fifth and sixth
centuries. Thus Cod. Alexandrinus reads Rom. xvi. 25-27 not only in its
proper place, but also at the end of ch. xiv where the Lectionaries place it
(see p. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>). Codex Bezae prefixes to Luke xvi. 19 εἶπεν δὲ καὶ ἐτέραν παραβολήν,
the proper introduction to the Gospel for the 5th Sunday in St. Luke. To
John xiv. 1 the same manuscript prefixes καὶ εἶπεν τοῖς μαθηταῖς αὐτοῦ, as does
our English Prayer Book in the Gospel for May 1. Even τέλος or τὸ τέλος, which
follows ἀπέχει in Mark xiv. 41 in the same manuscript and other authorities,
probably has the same origin.</note>. All the information
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
we can gather favours the notion that there was no great
difference between the calendar of Church-lessons in earlier and
later stages. Not only do they correspond in all cases where
such agreement is natural, as in the proper services for the
great feasts and fasts, but in such purely arbitrary arrangements
as the reading of the book of Genesis, instead of the Gospels,
on the week days of Lent; of the Acts all the time between
Easter and Pentecost<note place='foot'>See the passages from Augustine Tract. <hi rend='smallcaps'>vi.</hi> in Joan.; and Chrysost. Hom.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>vii</hi> ad Antioch.; Hom. <hi rend='smallcaps'>lxiii</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>xlvii</hi> in Act. in Bingham's Antiquities, Book <hi rend='smallcaps'>xiv</hi>,
Chap. <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii</hi>. Sect. 3. Chrysostom even calls the arrangement τῶν πατέρων ὁ
νόμος. The strong passage cited from Cyril of Jerusalem by Dean Burgon
(Last Twelve Verses of St. Mark, p. 195) shows the confirmed practice as
already settled in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 348.</note>; and the selection of St. Matthew's history
of the Passion alone at the Liturgy on Good Friday<note place='foot'>August. Serm. <hi rend='smallcaps'>cxliii</hi> de Tempore. The few verses Luke xxiii. 39-43,
John xix. 31-37 are merely wrought into one narrative with Matt. xxvii,
each in its proper place. See p. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>.</note>. The
earliest formal <foreign rend='italic'>Menologium</foreign>, or Table of proper lessons, now
extant is prefixed to the Codex Cyprius (K) of the eighth or
ninth century; another is found in the Codex Campianus (M),
which is perhaps a little later; they are more frequently found
than the contrary in later manuscripts of every kind; while
there are comparatively few copies that have not been accommodated
to ecclesiastical use either by their original scribe or
a later hand, by means of noting the proper days for each lesson
(often in red ink) at the top or bottom or in the margin of the
several pages. Not only in the margin, but even in the text
itself are perpetually interpolated, mostly in vermilion or red
ink, the beginning (ἀρχή or αρ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>χ</hi>) and ending (τέλος or τε<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>λ</hi>) of each
lesson, and the several words to be inserted or substituted in
order to suit the purpose of public reading; from which source
(as we have stated above, p. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>) various readings have almost
unavoidably sprung: e.g. in Acts iii. 11 τοῦ ἰαθέντος χωλοῦ of the
Lectionaries ultimately displaced αὐτοῦ from the text itself.
</p>

<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>

<p>
We purpose to annex to this Chapter a table of lessons
throughout the year, according to the use laid down in Synaxaria,
Menologies, and Lectionaries, as well to enable the student to
compare the proper lessons of the Greek Church with our own,
as to facilitate reference to the manuscripts themselves, which
are now placed almost out of the reach of the inexperienced.
On comparing the manner in which the terms are used by
different scribes and authors, we conceive that <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Synaxarion</foreign>
(συναξάριον) is, like Eclogadion, a name used for a table of daily
lessons for the year beginning at Easter, and that these have
varied but slightly in the course of many ages throughout the
whole Eastern Church; that tables of Saints' day lessons, called
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Menologies</foreign>, (μηνολόγιον), distributed in order of the months from
September (when the new year and the indiction began) to
August, differed widely from each other, both in respect to the
lessons read and the days kept holy<note place='foot'>Besides this special meaning, Synaxarion was also employed in a general
sense for any catalogue of Church-lessons, both for daily use and for Saints'
days.</note>. While the great feasts
remained entirely the same, different generations and provinces
and even dioceses had their favourite worthies, whose memory
they specially cherished; so that the character of the menology
(which sometimes forms a larger, sometimes but a small portion
of a Lectionary) will often guide us to the country and district
in which the volume itself was written. The Parham Evangelistarium
18 affords us a conspicuous example of this fact:
coming from a region of which we know but little (Ciscissa in
Cappadocia Prima), its menology in many particulars but little
resembles those usually met with<note place='foot'>This was naturally even more the case in countries where the Liturgy was
not in Greek. Thus in the <q>Calendar of the Coptic Church</q> translated from
the Arabic by Dr. S. C. Malan (1873), the only Feast-days identical with those
given below (pp. 87-89) are Sept. 14; Oct. 8; Nov. 8, 13, 14, 17, 25, 30; Dec. 20,
24, 25, 29; Jan. 1, 6 (the Lord's Baptism), 22; Feb. 2, 24; March 25; April 25;
May 2; June 19, 24, 29; July 22; Aug. 6, 25. Elsewhere the day is altered,
even if the festival be the same; e.g. St. Thomas' Day is Oct. 6 with the Greeks,
Oct. 23 with the Copts; St. Luke's Day (Oct. 18), and the Beheading of the
Baptist (Aug. 29), are kept by the Copts a day later than by the Greeks, since
Aug. 29 is their New Year's Day.</note>.
</p>

<p>
14. It only remains to say a few words about the <emph>notation</emph>
adopted to indicate the several classes of manuscripts of the
Greek Testament. These classes are six in number; that containing
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
the Gospels (<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Evangelia</foreign> or <hi rend='italic'>Evan.</hi>), or the Acts and
Catholic Epistles (<hi rend='italic'>Act.</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Cath.</hi>), or the Pauline Epistles (<hi rend='italic'>Paul.</hi>),
or the Apocalypse (<hi rend='italic'>Apoc.</hi>), or Lectionaries of the Gospels (<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Evangelistaria</foreign>
or <hi rend='italic'>Evst.</hi>), or those of the Acts and Epistles (<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Apostolos</foreign> or
<hi rend='italic'>Apost.</hi>). When one manuscript (as often happens) belongs to
more than one of these classes, its distinct parts are numbered
separately, so that a copy of the whole New Testament will
appear in four lists, and be reckoned four times over. All
critics are agreed in distinguishing the documents written in the
uncial character by capital letters; the custom having originated
in the accidental circumstance that the Codex Alexandrinus
was designated as Cod. A in the lower margin of Walton's
Polyglott. Lectionaries in uncial letters are not marked by
capitals, but by Arabic numerals, like cursive manuscripts of all
classes<note place='foot'>This system was introduced by Wetstein (N. T. 1751-52). Mill used to cite
copies by abridgements of their names, e.g. Alex. Cant. Mont. &amp;c.</note>. Of course no system can escape some attendant evils.
Even the catalogue of the later manuscripts is often upon its
first appearance full of mis-statements, of repetitions and loose
descriptions, which must be remedied and supplied in subsequent
examination, so far as opportunity is granted from time to time.
In describing the uncials (as we purpose to do in the two
next chapters) our course is tolerably plain; but the lists that
comprise the last eight chapters of this volume, and which
respectively detail the cursive manuscripts and the Lectionaries
of the Greek Testament, must be regarded only as an approximation
to what such an enumeration ought to be, though much
pains and time have been spent upon them: the comparatively
few copies which seem to be sufficiently known are distinguished
by an asterisk from their less fortunate kindred.
</p>

<p>
For indeed the only method of grappling with the perplexity
produced by the large additions of manuscripts, especially of the
cursive character, which constant discovery has effected during
late years, is to enumerate arithmetically those which have been
supplied from time to time, as was done in the last edition of this
work, carefully noting if they have been examined by a competent
judge or especially if they have been properly collated.
In the Appendix of the third edition, the late Dean Burgon
continued his work in this direction by adding a list of some
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
three hundred and seventy-four cursives, besides the others with
which he had previously increased the number before known.
That list, as was stated in the Postscript to the Preface, awaited
an examination and collation by competent persons. Such an
examination has been made in many instances by Dr. C. R.
Gregory, who also, whether fired by Dean Burgon's example as
shown in his published letters in the <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi> or not, has in
his turn added with most commendable diligence in research
a very large number of MSS. previously unknown. Some more
have been added in this edition, but much work is still required
of scholars, before this mass of materials can be used with effect
by Textual students.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Appendix To Chapter III. Synaxarion And Eclogadion Of The Gospels And Apostolic
Writings Daily Throughout The Year.</head>

<p>
[Gathered chiefly from Evangelist. Arund. 547, Parham 18, Harl. 5598, Burney 22,
Gale O. 4. 22, Christ's Coll. Camb. F. 1. 8, compared with the Liturgical notes in
Wake 12, and those by later hands in Cod. Bezae (D). Use has been made
also of Apostolos B-C. <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii</hi>. 24, B-C. <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii</hi>. 53, and the Euchology, or Book of Offices,
B-C. <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii</hi>. 42.]
</p>

<p>
Ἐκ τοῦ κατὰ Ἰωάννην [Arundel 547]
</p>

<p>
Τῇ ἁγίᾳ καὶ μεγάλῃ κυριακῇ τοῦ πάσχα.
</p>

<lg>
<l>Easter-day, John i. 1-17. Acts i. 1-8.</l>
<l>2nd day of Easter week (τῆς διακινησίμου) 18-28. Acts 12-26.</l>
<l>3rd, Luke xxiv. 12-35. Acts ii. 14-21.</l>
<l>4th, John i. 35-52. Acts ii. 38-43.</l>
<l>5th, John iii. 1-15. Acts iii. 1-8.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ) John ii. 12-22. Acts ii. 12-36.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ) John iii. 22-33. Acts iii. 11-16.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ἀντίπασχα or 1st Sunday after Easter (τοῦ Θωμᾶ, B-C. iii. 42) John xx. 19-31. Acts v. 12-20.</l>
<l>2nd day of 2nd week, John ii. 1-11. Acts iii. 19-26.</l>
<l>3rd, John iii. 16-21. Acts iv. 1-10.</l>
<l>4th, John v. 17-24. Acts iv. 13-22.</l>
<l>5th, John v. 24-30. Acts iv. 23-31.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ) John v. 30-vi. 2. Acts v. 1-11.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ) John vi. 14-27. Acts v. 21-32.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ γ´ or 2nd after Easter (τῶν μυροφόρων, B-C. iii. 42)
Mark xv. 43-xvi. 8. Acts vi. 1-7.</l>
<l>2nd day of 3rd week John iv. 46-54. Acts vi. 8-vii. 60.</l>
<l>3rd, John vi. 27-33. Acts viii. 5-17.</l>
<l>4th (6th, Gale), John vi. 48-54. Acts viii. 18-25.</l>
<l>5th, John vi. 40-44. Acts viii. 26-39.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ, 4th, Gale) John vi. 35-39. Acts viii. 40-ix. 19.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ) John xv. 17-xvi. 1. Acts viii. 19-31.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ δ´ or 3rd Sunday after Easter (τοῦ παραλύτου sic,
B-C. iii. 42) John v. 1-15. Acts ix. 32-42.</l>
<l>2nd day of 4th week, John vi. 56-69. Acts x. 1-16.</l>
<l>3rd, John vii. 1-13. Acts x. 21-33.</l>
<l>4th (τῆς μεσοπεντηκοστῆς, B-C. iii. 42) John vii. 14-30. Acts xiv. 6-18.</l>
<l>5th, John viii. 12-20. Acts x. 34-43.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ) John viii. 21-30. Acts x. 44-xi. 10.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ) John viii. 31-42. Acts xii. 1-11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ ε´ or 4th Sunday after Easter (τῆς σαμαρείτιδος)
John iv. 5-42. Acts xi. 19-30.</l>
<l>2nd day of 5th week, John viii. 42-51. Acts xii. 12-17.</l>
<l>3rd, John viii. 51-59. Acts xii. 25-xiii. 12.</l>
<l>4th, John vi. 5-14. Acts xiii. 13-24.</l>
<l>5th, John ix. 49-x. 9. Acts xiv. 20-27 (-xv. 4, B-C. iii. 24).</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ) John x. 17-28. Acts xv. 5-12.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ) John x. 27-38. Acts xv. 35-41.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ ϛ´ or 5th Sunday after Easter (τοῦ τυφλοῦ) John ix. 1-38. Acts xvi. 16-34.</l>
<l>2nd day of 6th week, John xi. 47-54. Acts xvii. 1-9.</l>
<l>3rd, John xii. 19-36. Acts xvii. 19-27.</l>
<l>4th, John xii. 36-47. Acts xviii. 22-28.</l>
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
<l>5th Ἀναλήψεως, Ascension Day</l>
<l>Matins, Mark xvi. 9-20.</l>
<l>Liturgy, Luke xxiv. 36-53. Acts i. 1-12.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ) (11, Gale, Wake 12). John xiv. 1-10. Acts xix. 1-8.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ) John xiv. 10-21 (om. 18-20, Gale). Acts xx. 7-12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ ϛ´ or 6th Sunday after Easter τῶν ἁγίων <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>τιη</hi> πατέρων ἐν Νικαίᾳ. John xvii. 1-13. Acts xx. 16-38.</l>
<l>2nd day of 7th week, John xiv. 27-xv. 7. Acts xxi. 8-14.</l>
<l>3rd, John xvi. 2-13. Acts xxi. 26-32.</l>
<l>4th, John xvi. 15-23. Acts. xxiii. 1-11.</l>
<l>5th, John xvi. 23-33. Acts xxv. 13-19.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ) John xvii. 18-26. Acts xxvii. 1-xxviii. 1</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ) John xxi. 14-25. Acts xxviii. 1-31.</l>
</lg>

<p>
Κυριακῇ τῆς πεντηκοστῆς
</p>

<lg>
<l>Whitsunday.</l>
<l>Matins, John xx. 19-23.</l>
<l>Liturgy, John vii. 37-viii. 12<note place='foot'>The <hi rend='italic'>pericope adulterae</hi> John vii. 53-viii. 11 is omitted in all the copies we know on the feast of
Pentecost. Whenever read it was on some Saint's Day (<hi rend='italic'>vid. infra</hi>, p. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>notes</hi> 2, 3).</note>. Acts ii. 1-11.</l>
</lg>

<p>
Ἐκ τοῦ κατὰ Ματθαῖον.
</p>

<lg>
<l>2nd day of 1st. week. Τῇ ἐπαύριον τῆς πεντηκοστῆς.</l>
<l>Matt. xviii. 10-20. Eph. v. 8-19.</l>
<l>3rd, Matt. iv. 25-v. 11.</l>
<l>4th, Matt. v. 20-30.</l>
<l>5th, Matt. v. 31-41.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ) Matt. vii. 9-18.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ) Matt. v. 42-48. Rom. i. 7-12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ α´ τῶν ἁγίων πάντων, Matt. x. 32-33; 37-38; xix. 37-30;
Heb. xi. 33-xii. 2.</l>
<l>2nd day of 2nd week, Matt. vi. 31-34; vii. 9-14. Rom. ii. 1-6.</l>
<l>3rd, Matt. vii. 15-21. Rom. ii. 13, 17-27.</l>
<l>4th, Matt. vii. 11-23. Rom. ii. 28-iii. 4.</l>
<l>5th, Matt. viii. 23-27. Rom. iii. 4-9.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), Matt. ix. 14-17. Rom. iii. 9-18.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ) Matt.  vii. 1-8. Rom. iii. 19-26.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ β´ Matt. iv. 18-23. Rom. ii. 10-16.</l>
<l>2nd day of 3rd week, Matt. ix. 36-x. 8. Rom. iv. 4-8.</l>
<l>3rd, Matt. x. 9-15. Rom. iv. 8-12.</l>
<l>4th, Matt. x. 16-22. Rom. iv. 13-17.</l>
<l>5th, Matt. x. 23-31. Rom. iv. 18-25.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), Matt. x. 32-36; xi. 1. Rom. v. 12-14.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), Matt. vii. 24-viii. 4. Rom. iii. 28-iv. 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ γ´, Matt. vi. 22-23. Rom. v. 1-10.</l>
<l>2nd day of 4th week, Matt. xi. 2-15. Rom. v. 15-17.</l>
<l>3rd, Matt. xi. 16-20. Rom. v. 17-21.</l>
<l>4th, Matt. xi. 20-26. Rom. vii. 1....</l>
<l>5th, Matt. xi. 27-30.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), Matt. xii.  1-8.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), Matt. viii. 14-23.
(om. 19-22, Gale). Rom. vi. 11-17.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ δ´, matt. viii. 5-13. Rom.  vi. 18-23.</l>
<l>2nd day of 5th week, Matt. xii. 9-13. Rom. vii. 19-viii. 3.</l>
<l>3rd, Matt. xii. 14-16; 22-30. Rom. viii. 2-9.</l>
<l>4th, Matt. xii. 38-45. Rom. viii. 8-14.</l>
<l>5th, Matt. xii. 46-xiii. 3. Rom. viii. 22-27.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), Matt. xii. 3-12. Rom. ix. 6-13.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), Matt. ix. 9-13. Rom. viii. 14-21.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ ε´, Matt. viii. 28-ix. 1. Rom. x. 1-10</l>
<l>2nd day of 6th week, Matt. xiii. 10-23. Rom. ix. 13-19.</l>
<l>3rd, Matt. xiii. 24-30. Rom. ix. 17-28.</l>
<l>4th, Matt. xiii. 31-36. Rom. ix. 29-33.</l>
<l>5th, Matt. xiii. 36-43. Rom. ix. 33; x. 12-17.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), Matt. xiii. 44-54. Rom. x. 15-xi. 2.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), Matt. ix. 18-26. Rom. ix. 1-5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριρκῇ ϛ´, Matt. ix. 1-8. Rom. xii. 6-14.</l>
<l>2nd day of 7th week, Matt. xiii. 54-58. Rom. xi. 2-6.</l>
<l>3rd, Matt. xiv. 1-13. Rom. xi. 7-12.</l>
<l>4th, Matt. xiv. 35-xv. 11. Rom. xi. 13-20.</l>
<l>5th, Matt. xiv. 12-21. Rom. xi. 19-24.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), Matt. xiv. 29-31. Rom. xi. 25-28.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), Matt. x. 37-xi. 1. Rom. xii. 1-3.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ ζ´ Matt. ix. 27-35. Rom. xv. 1-7.</l>
<l>2nd day of 8th week, Matt. xvi. 1-6. Rom. xi. 29-36.</l>
<l>3rd, Matt. xvi. 6-12. Rom. xii. 14-21.</l>
<l>4th, Matt. xvi. 20-24. Rom. xiv. 10-18.</l>
<l>5th, Matt. xvi. 24-28. Rom. xv. 8-12.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), Matt. xvii. 10-18. Rom. xv. 13-16.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), Matt. xii. 30-37. Rom. xiii. 1-10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ η´, Matt. xiv. 14-22.   1 Cor. i. 10-18.</l>
<l>2nd day of 9th week, Matt. xiv. xviii. 1-11.  Rom. xv. 17-25.</l>
<l>3rd xviii. 18-20 (al. 22); Matt. xix. 1-2; 13-15. Rom. xv. 26-29.</l>
<l>4th, Matt. xx. 1-16. Rom. xvi. 17-20.</l>
<l>5th, Matt. xx. 17-28. 1 Cor. ii. 10-15.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), Matt. xxi. 12-14; 17-20. 1 Cor. ii. 16-iii. 8.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), Matt. xv. 32-39. Rom. xiv. 6-9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ θ´, Matt. xiv. 22-34. 1 Cor. iii. 9-17.</l>
<l>2nd day of 10th week, Matt. xxi. 18-22. 1 Cor. iii. 18-23.</l>
<l>3rd, Matt. xxi. 23-27. 1 Cor iv. 5-8.</l>
<l>4th, Matt. xxi. 28-32. 1 Cor. v. 9-13.</l>
<l>5th, Matt. xxi. 43-46. 1 Cor. vi. 1-6.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), Matt. xxii. 23-33. 1 Cor. vi. 7-11.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), Matt. xvii. 24-xviii. 1.  Rom. xv. 30-33.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ ι´, Matt. xvii. 14-23. 1 Cor. iv. 9-16.</l>
<l>2nd day of 11th week, Matt. xxiii. 13-22. 1 Cor. vi. 20-vii. 7.</l>
<l>3rd, Matt. xxiii. 23-28. 1 Cor. vii. 7-15.</l>
<l>4th, Matt. xxiii. 29-39.</l>
<l>5th, Matt. xxiv. 13 (14, Wake 12; 15 Cod. Bezae) -28.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), Matt. xxiv. 27-35 (33 Sch. and Matt.); 42-51. &mdash;vii. 35.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), Matt. xix. 3-12. 1 Cor. i. 3-9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ ια´, Matt. xviii. 23-35. 1 Cor. ix. 2-12.</l>
</lg>

<p>
Ἐκ τοῦ κατὰ Μάρκον.
</p>

<lg>
<l>2nd day of 12th week, Mark i. 9-15.  1 Cor. vii. 37-viii. 3.</l>
<l>3rd, Mark i. 16-22. 1 Cor. viii. 4-7.</l>
<l>4th, Mark i. 23-28. 1 Cor. ix. 13-18.</l>
<l>5th, Mark i. 29-35. 1 Cor. x. 2-10.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), Mark ii. 18-22. 1 Cor. x. 10-15.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), Matt. xx. 29-34. 1 Cor. i. 26-29.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ ιβ´, Matt. xix. 16-26. 1 Cor. xv. 1-11.</l>
<l>2nd day of 13th week, Mark iii. 6-12. 1 Cor. x. 14-23.</l>
<l>3rd, Mark iii. 13-21. 1 Cor. x. 31-xi. 3.</l>
<l>4th, Mark iii. 20-27. 1 Cor. xi. 4-12.</l>
<l>5th, Mark iii. 28-35. 1 Cor. xi. 13-23.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), Mark iv. 1-9. 1 Cor. xi. 31.-xii. 6.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), Matt. xxii. 15-22. 1 Cor. ii. 6-9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ ιγ´, Matt. xxi. 33-42. 1 Cor. xvi. 13-24.</l>
<l>2nd day of 14th week, Mark iv. 10-23. 1 Cor. xii. 12-18.</l>
<l>3rd, Mark iv. 24-34. 1 Cor. xii. 18-26.</l>
<l>4th, Mark iv. 35-41. 1 Cor. xiii. 8-xiv. 1.</l>
<l>5th, Mark v. 1-20 (al. 17). 1 Cor. xiv. 1-12.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), Mark v. 22-24; 35-vi. 1. 1 Cor xiv. 12-20.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), Matt. xxiii. 1-12. 1 Cor. iv. 1-5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριαλῇ ιδ´, Matt. xxii. 2-14. 2 Cor. i. 21-ii. 4.</l>
<l>2nd day of 15th week, Mark v. 24-34. 1 Cor. xiv. 26-33.</l>
<l>3rd, Mark vi. 1-7. 1 Cor. xiv. 33-40.</l>
<l>4th, Mark vi. 7-13. 1 Cor. xv. 12-20.</l>
<l>5th, Mark vi. 30-45. 1 Cor. xv. 29-34.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), Mark vi. 45-53. 1 Cor. xv. 34-40.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), Matt. xxiv. 1-13 (om. 10-12, Gale).
1 Cor. iv. 7-v. 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ ιε´, Matt. xxii. 35-40. 2 Cor. iv. 6-11
(15, B-C. III. 24).</l>
<l>2nd day of 16th week, Mark vi. 54 (al. 56)&mdash;vii. 8. 1 Cor. xvi. 3-13.</l>
<l>3rd, Mark vi. 5-16. 2 Cor. i. 1-7.</l>
<l>4th, Mark vi. 14-24. 2 Cor. i. 12-20.</l>
<l>5th, Mark vi. 24-30. 2 Cor. ii. 4-15.</l>
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), Mark viii. 1-10. 2 Cor. ii. 15-iii. 3.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), Matt. xxiv. 34-37; 42-44. 1 Cor. x. 23-28.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>[Κυριακῇ ιϛ´ (16th) Matt. xxv. 14-30 (29, Gale). 2 Cor. vi. 1-10<note place='foot'>Lessons for the week in B-C. III. 24 are (2) 2 Cor. iii. 4-12. (3) iv. 1-6. (4) 11-18. (5) v. 10-15.
(6) 15-21.</note>.</l>
<l>σαββάτῳ ιζ´ (17th) Matt. xxv. 1-13.</l>
<l>Κυριακῇ ιζ´ (17th) Matt. xv. 21-28].</l>
</lg>

<p>
Ἀρχὴ τῆς ἰνδικτοῦ τοῦ νέου ἔτους, ἤγουν τοῦ εὐαγγελιστοῦ λουκᾶ [Arund. 547,
Parham 18].
</p>

<lg>
<l>Ἐκ τοῦ κατὰ Λουκᾶν [Christ's Coll. F. 1. 8].</l>
<l>2nd day of 1st week, Luke iii. 19-22.</l>
<l>3rd, 23-iv. 1.</l>
<l>4th, 1-15.</l>
<l>5th, 16-22.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), 22-30.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), 31-36.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ α´, v. 1-11.</l>
<l>2nd day of 2nd week, iv. 38-44.</l>
<l>3rd, v. 12-16.</l>
<l>4th, 33-39.</l>
<l>5th, vi. 12-16 (al. 19).</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), 17-23.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), v. 17-26.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ β´, v. 31-36.</l>
<l>2nd day of 3rd week, 24-30.</l>
<l>3rd, 37-45.</l>
<l>4th, vi. 46-vii. 1.</l>
<l>5th, vii. 17-30.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), 31-35.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), v. 27-32.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ γ´, vii. 11-16.</l>
<l>2nd day of 4th week, 36-50.</l>
<l>3rd, vii. 1-3.</l>
<l>4th, 22-25.</l>
<l>5th, ix. 7-11.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), 12-18.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), vi. 1-10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ δ´, Luke viii. 5-8, 9-15.</l>
<l>2nd day of 5th week, ix. 18-22.</l>
<l>3rd, 23-27.</l>
<l>4th, 43-50.</l>
<l>5th, 49-56.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), v. 1-15.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), vii. 1-10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ ε´, xvi. 19-31.</l>
<l>2nd day of 6th week, x. 22-24.</l>
<l>3rd, xi. 1-10 (Mt.).</l>
<l>4th, 9-13.</l>
<l>5th, 14-23.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), 23-26.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), viii. 16-21.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ ϛ´, viii. 27 (26, Gale)-35; 38-39.</l>
<l>2nd day of 7th week, xi. 29-33.</l>
<l>3rd, 34-41.</l>
<l>4th, 42-46.</l>
<l>5th, 47-xii. 1.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), xii. 2-12.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), ix. 1-6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ ζ´, viii. 41-56.</l>
<l>2nd day of 8th week, xii. 13-15; 22-31.</l>
<l>3rd, xii. 42-48.</l>
<l>4th, 48-59.</l>
<l>5th, xiii. 1-9.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), 31-35.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), ix. 37-43.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ η´, x. 25-37.</l>
<l>2nd day of 9th week, xiv. 12-51.</l>
<l>3rd, Luke xiv. 25-35.</l>
<l>4th, xv. 1-10.</l>
<l>5th, xvi. 1-9.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), xvi. 15-18; xvii. 1-4.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), ix. 57-62.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ θ´, xii. 16-21.</l>
<l>2nd day of 10th week, xvii. 20-25.</l>
<l>3rd, xvii. 26-37; xviii. 18.</l>
<l>4th, xviii. 15-17; 26-30.</l>
<l>5th, 31-34.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), xix. 12-28.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), x. 19-21.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ ι´, xiii. 10-17.</l>
<l>2nd day of 11th week, xix. 37-44.</l>
<l>3rd, 45-48.</l>
<l>4th, xx. 1-8.</l>
<l>5th, 9-18.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), 19-26.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), xii. 32-40.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ ια´, xiv. 16-24.</l>
<l>2nd day of 12th week, xx. 27-44.</l>
<l>3rd, xxi. 12-19.</l>
<l>4th, xxi. 5-8; 10-11; 20-24.</l>
<l>5th, xxi. 28-33.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), xxi. 37-xxii. 8.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), xiii. 19-29.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ ιβ´, xvii. 12-19.</l>
<l>2nd day of 13th week, Mark viii. 11-21.</l>
<l>3rd, 22-26.</l>
<l>4th, 30-34.</l>
<l>5th, ix. 10-16.</l>
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), Mark ix. 33-41.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), Luke xiv. 1-11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ ιγ´, Luke xviii. 18-27.</l>
<l>2nd day of 14th week, Mark ix. 42.-x. 1.</l>
<l>3rd, x. 2-11.</l>
<l>4th, 11-16.</l>
<l>5th, 17-27.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), 24-32.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), Luke xvi. 10-15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ ιδ´, Luke xviii. 35-43.</l>
<l>2nd day of 15th week, Mark x. 46-52.</l>
<l>3rd, xi. 11-23.</l>
<l>4th, 22-26.</l>
<l>5th, 27-33.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), xii. 1-12.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), Luke xvii. 3-10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ ιε´, Luke xix. 1-10.</l>
<l>2nd day of 16th week, Mark xii. 13-17.</l>
<l>3rd, 18-27.</l>
<l>4th, 28-34.</l>
<l>5th, 38-44.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), xiii. 1-9.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), Luke xviii. 1-8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ ϛ´ (<hi rend='italic'>of the Publican</hi>), Luke xviii. 9-14.
Apost. 2 Tim. iii. 10-15.
(B-C. III. 42).</l>
<l>2nd day of 17th week, Mark xiii. 9-13.</l>
<l>3rd, 14-23.</l>
<l>4th, 24-31.</l>
<l>5th, xiii. 31-xiv. 2.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), xiv. 3-9.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), Luke xx. 46-xxi. 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ ιζ´ (<hi rend='italic'>of the Canaanitess</hi>) Matt. xv. 21-28.</l>
<l>σαββάτῳ πρὸ τῆς ἀποκρέω, Luke xv. 1-10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ πρὸ τῆς ἀποκρέω, (<hi rend='italic'>of the Prodigal</hi>),
Luke xv. 11-32.  1 Thess. v. 14-23 (1 Cor. vi. 12-20, B-C. III. 42).</l>
<l>2nd day of the week <hi rend='italic'>of the Carnival</hi>, Mark xi. 1-11.  2 Tim. iii. 1-10.</l>
<l>3rd,  xiv. 10-42. iii. 14-iv. 5.</l>
<l>4th, 43-xv. 1. iv. 9-18.</l>
<l>5th, xv. 1-15.  Tit. i. 5-12.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ) xv. 20; 22; 25; 33-41. Tit. i. 15-ii. 10.</l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ) Luke xxi. 8-9; 25-27; 33-36; 1 Cor. vi. 12-20 (2 Tim. ii.
11-19, B-C. III. 24).</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ τῆς ἀποκρέω,  Matt. xxv. 31-46. 1 Cor. viii. 8-ix. 2 (1 Cor. vi. 12-20,
B-C. III. 24).</l>
<l>2nd day of the week <hi rend='italic'>of the cheese-eater</hi>
Luke xix. 29-40; xxii. 7-8; 39. Heb. iv. 1-13.</l>
<l>3rd, xxii. 39-xxiii. 1. Heb. v. 12-vi. 8.</l>
<l>4th, <hi rend='italic'>deest.</hi></l>
<l>5th, xxiii 1-33; 44-56. Heb. xxii. 14-27.</l>
<l>6th (παρασκευῇ), <hi rend='italic'>deest.</hi></l>
<l>7th (σαββάτῳ), Matt. vi. 1-13. Rom. xiv. 19-23; xvi. 25-27.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ τῆς τυροφάγου Matt. vi. 14-21. Rom. xiii. 11-xiv. 4.</l>
<l>Παννυχὶς τῆς ἁγίας νηστείας.</l>
<l>Vigil of Lent (Parh., Christ's) Matt. vii. 7-11.</l>
</lg>

<p>
Τῶν νηστειῶν (Lent).
</p>

<p>
σαββάτῳ α´,
Mark ii. 23-iii. 5.   Heb. i. 1-12.
</p>

<p>
Κυριακῇ α´, John i. 44-52. Heb. xi. 24-40.
</p>

<p>
σαββάτῳ β´, Mark i. 35-44. iii. 12-14.
</p>

<p>
Κυριακῇ β´, ii. 1-12. i. 10-ii. 3.
</p>

<p>
σαββάτῳ γ´, 14-17. x. 32-37.
</p>

<p>
Κυριακῇ γ´, viii. 34-ix 1. iv. 14-v. 6.
</p>

<p>
σαββάτῳ δ´, vii. 31-37. vi. 9-12.
</p>

<p>
Κυριακῇ δ´, ix. 17-31. 13-20.
</p>

<p>
σαββάτῳ ε´, viii. 27-31. ix. 24-28.
</p>

<p>
Κυριακῇ ε´, x. 32-45. 11-14.
</p>

<p>
σαββάτῳ ϛ´ (<hi rend='italic'>of Lazarus</hi>)
John xi. 1-45. xii. 28-xiii. 8.
</p>

<p>
Κυριακῇ ϛ´ τῶν Βαΐων, Matins, Matt. xxi.
1-11; 15-17 [εἰς τὴν λιτήν, Mark x.
46-xi. 11, Burney 22]. Liturgy, John
xii. 1-18. Phil. iv. 4-9.
</p>

<p>
Τῇ ἁγίᾳ μεγάλῃ (Holy Week).
</p>

<p>
2nd, Matins, Matt. xxi. 18-43.
Liturgy,   xxiv. 3-35.
</p>

<p>
3rd, Matins,  xxii. 15-xxiv. 2.
Liturgy, xxiv. 36-xxvi. 2.
</p>

<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>

<p>
4th, Matins, John (xi. 47-53 (al 56) Gale) xii. 17 (al. 19)-47
(al. 50). Liturgy, Matt. xxvi. 6-16.
</p>

<p>
5th, Matins, Luke xxii. 1-36 (39, Gale).
Liturgy, Matt. xxvi. 1-20.
</p>

<p>
Εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ νιπτῆρος, John xiii. 3-10.
</p>

<p>
μετὰ τὸ νίψασθαι,  12-17<note place='foot'>In B-C. III. 42 all the Gospels for this day run into each other without break, e.g. John xiii.
3-17 being read <foreign rend='italic'>uno tenore</foreign>. Just so in the same manuscript stands the mixed lesson for Good
Friday evening.</note>;
Matt. xxvi. 21-39; Luke xxii. 43, 44;
Matt. xxvi. 40-xxvii. 2. 1 Cor. xi. 23-32.
</p>

<p>
Εὐαγγέλια τῶν ἁγίων πάθων <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ιυ</hi> <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>χυ</hi>. (Twelve
Gospels of the Passions).
</p>

<p>
(1) John xiii. 31-xviii. 1. (2) John xviii. 1-28.
(3) Matt. xxvi. 57-75. (4) John xviii.
28-xix. 16. (5) Matt. xxvii. 3-32. (6)
Mark xv. 16-32. (7) Matt. xxvii. 33-54.
(8) Luke xxiii. 32-49.  (9) John xix.
25-37. (10) Mark xv. 43-47  (11) John
xix. 38-42. (12) Matt. xxvii. 62-66.
</p>

<p>
Εὐαγγέλια τῶν ὡρῶν τῆς ἁγίας παραμονῆς.
(Night-watches of Vigil of Good Friday).
</p>

<p>
Hour (1) Matt. xxvii. 1-56. (3) Mark
xv. 1-41. (6) Luke xxii. 66-xxiii. 49.
(9) John xix. 16 (al. 23 or xviii. 28)-37.
</p>

<p>
Τῇ ἁγίᾳ παρασκευῇ (Good Friday) εἰς τὴν λειτουργίαν (ἑσπέρας, B-C. III. 42).
</p>

<p>
Matt. xxvii. 1-38; Luke xxiii. 39-43;
Matt. xxvii. 39-54; John xix. 31-37;
Matt. xxvii. 55-61. 1 Cor. i. 18-ii. 2.
</p>

<p>
Τῷ ἁγίῳ καὶ μεγάλῳ σαββάτῳ (Easter
Even).
</p>

<p>
Matins, Matt, xxvii. 62-66. 1 Cor. v. 6-8
(Gal. iii. 13, 14, B-C. III. 24).
Evensong, Matt, xxviii. 1-20. Rom. vi.
3-11 (λειτουργ. Matt. xxviii. 1-20, ἑσπέρας
Rom. vi. 3-11, B-C. III. 42).
</p>

<p>
Εὐαγγέλια ἀναστάσιμα ἑωθινά (<hi rend='italic'>vid.</hi> Suicer
Thes. Eccles. 1. 1229), eleven Gospels,
used in turn, one every Sunday at
Matins, beginning with All Saints' Day
(B-C. III. 42). In some Evst. these
are found at the end of the book.
</p>

<p>
(1) Matt. xxviii. 16-20. (2) Mark xvi.
1-8. (3) <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> 9-20. (4) Luke xxiv. 1-12.
(5) <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> 12-35. (6) <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> 36-53. (7) John
xx. 1-10. (8) <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> 11-18. (9) <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> 19-31.
(10) John xxi. 1-14. (11) <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> 15-25.
</p>

<p>
We have now traced the daily service of the Greek Church, as derived from
the Gospels, throughout the whole year, from Easter Day to Easter Even, only
that in Lent the lessons from the 2nd to the 6th days inclusive in each week
are taken from the book of Genesis. The reader will observe that from Easter
to Pentecost St. John and the Acts are read for seven weeks, or eight Sundays.
The first Sunday after Pentecost is the Greek All Saints' Day, their Trinity Sunday
being virtually kept a fortnight earlier; but from the Monday next after the day of
Pentecost (Whit-Monday) St. Matthew is used continuously every day for eleven
weeks and as many Sundays. For six weeks more, St. Matthew is appointed for
the Saturday and Sunday lessons, St. Mark for the other days of the week. But
inasmuch as St. Luke was to be taken up with the new year, the year of the
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
indiction [Arund. 547], which in this case must be September 24<note place='foot'>The more usual indiction, which dates from Sept. 1, is manifestly excluded by the following
rubric (Burney, 22, p. 191, and in other copies): Δέοό γινώσκζιν ὅτι ἄρχδται ὁ Λουκᾶς ἀναγινώσκεσθαι
ἀπὸ τῆς Κυριακῆς μετὰ τὴν ὕψωσιν; τότε γὰρ καὶ ἡ ἰσυμερία [i.e. ἰσημερία] γίνεται, ὃ καλεῖται νέον ἔτος.
Ἤ ὅτι ἀπὸ τὰς [τῆς] κγ´ τοῦ σεπτευβρίου ὁ Λουκᾶς ἀναγινώσκεσαι.</note>, if all the lessons
in Matthew and Mark were not read out by this time (which, unless Easter was
very early, would not be the case), they were at once broken off, and (after proper
lessons had been employed for the Sunday before and the Saturday and Sunday
which followed<note place='foot'>The lesson for the Sunday after Sept. 14 is the same as that for the 3rd Sunday in Lent.</note> the feast of the Elevation of the Cross, Sept. 14) the lessons from
St. Luke (seventeen weeks and sixteen Sundays in all) were taken up and read on
as far as was necessary: only that the 17th Sunday of St. Matthew (called from the
subject of its Gospel <hi rend='italic'>the Canaanitess</hi>) was always resumed on the Sunday preceding
that before the Carnival (πρὸ τῆς ἀποκρέω), which is also named from its Gospel
that of <hi rend='italic'>the Prodigal</hi>, and answers to the Latin <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Septuagesima</foreign>. Then follow the Sunday
of the Carnival (ἀποκρέω) or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sexagesima</foreign>, that of the <hi rend='italic'>Cheese-eater</hi> (τυροφάγου) or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quinquagesima</foreign>,
and the six Sundays in Lent. The whole number of Sunday Gospels in
the year (even reckoning the two interpolated about September 14) is thus only
fifty-three, the <hi rend='italic'>Canaanitess</hi> coming twice over: but in the Menology or Catalogue of
immoveable feasts will be found proper lessons for three Saturdays and Sundays
about Christmas and Epiphany, which could either be substituted for, or added
to the ordinary Gospels for the year, according as the distance from Easter in one
year to Easter in the next exceeded or fell short of fifty-two weeks. The system
of lessons from the Acts and Epistles is much simpler than that of the Gospels:
it exhibits fifty-two Sundays in the year, without any of the complicated arrangements
of the other scheme. Since the Epistles from the Saturday of the 16th
week after Pentecost to the Sunday of the Prodigal could not be set (like the rest)
by the side of their corresponding Gospels, they are given separately in the
following table<note place='foot'>The ordinary lessons for week days stand thus in B-C. III. 24. Week ι´. (2) 2 Cor. iii, 4-12.
(3) iv. 1-6. (4) 11-18. (5) v. 10-15. (6) 15-21. ιζ´. (2) vi. 11-16. (3) vii. 1-11. (4) 10-16. (5) viii. 7-11.
(6) 10-21. ιη´. (2) viii. 20-ix. 1. (3) ix. 1-5. (4) 12-x. 5. (5) 4-12. (6) 13-18. ιθ´. (2) xi. 5-9. (3) 10-18.
(4) xii. 10-14 (5) 14-19. (6) 19-xiii. 1. κ´. (2) xiii. 2-7. (3)7-11. (4) Gal. i. 18-ii. 5. (5) ii. 6-16.
(6) ii. 20-iii. 7. κα´. (2) iii. 15-22. (3) 28-iv. 5. (4) iv. 9-14. (5) 13-26. (6) 28-v. 5. κβ´. (2) v. 4-14.
(3) 14-21. (4) vi. 2-10. (5) Eph. i. 9-17. (6) 16-23. κγ´. (2) ii. 18-iii. 5. (3) 5-12. (4) 13-21. (5) iv. 12-16.
(6) 17-25. κδ´. (2) v. 18-26. (3) 25-31. (4) 28-vi. 6. (5) 7-11. (6) 17-21. κε´. (2) Phil. i. 2. <hi rend='italic'>Hiat codex
usque ad'</hi> λ´. (1) 1 Thess. i. 6-10. (3) 9-ii. 4. (4) 4-8. (5) 9-14. (6) 14-20. λα´. (2) iii. 1-8. (3) 6-11.
(4) 11-iv. 6. (5) 7-11. (6) 17-v. 5. λβ´. (2) v. 4-11. (3) 11-15. (4) 15-23. (5) 2 Thess. i. 1-5. (6) 11-ii. 5.
λγ´. (2) ii. 13-iii. 5. (3) 3-9. (4) 10-18. (5) 1 Tim. i. 1-8. (6) 8-14. λδ´. (2) 1 Tim. ii. 5-15. (3) iii. 1-13.
(4) iv. 4-9. (5) 14-v. 10. (6) 17-vi. 2. λε´. (2) vi. 2-11. (3) 17-21. (4) 2 Tim. i. 8-14. (5) 14-ii. 2.
(6) 22-26.</note>.
</p>

<lg>
<l>Κυριακῇ ιϛ´  2 Cor. vi. 1-10.</l>
<l>σαββάτῳ ιζ´      1 Cor. xiv. 20-25.</l>
<l>Κυριακῇ ιζ´      2 Cor. vi. 16-viii. 1</l>
<l>σαββάτῳ ιε´      1 Cor. xv. 39-45.</l>
<l>Κυριακῇ ιε´     2 Cor. ix. 6-11.</l>
<l>σαββάτῳ ιθ´    1 Cor. xv. 58-xvi. 3.</l>
<l>Κυριακῇ ιθ´     2 Cor. xi. 31-xii. 9.</l>
<l>σαββάτῳ κ´      2 Cor. i. 8-11.</l>
<l>Κυριακῇ κ´      Gal. i. 11-19.</l>
<l>σαββάτῳ κα´     2 Cor. iii. 12-18.</l>
<l>Κυριακῇ κα´     Gal. ii. 16-20.</l>
<l>σαββάτῳ κβ´     2 Cor. v. 1-10 (1-4 in B-C. <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii</hi>. 24).</l>
<l>Κυριακῇ κβ´     Gal. vi. 11-18.</l>
<l>σαββάτῳ κγ´     2 Cor. viii. 1-5.</l>
<l>Κυριακῇ κγ´     Eph. ii. 4-10.</l>
<l>σαββάτῳ κδ´     2 Cor. xi. 1-6.</l>
<l>Κυριακῇ κδ´     Eph. ii. 14-22.</l>
<l>σαββάτῳ κε´     Gal. i. 3-10.</l>
<l>Κυριακῇ κε´     Eph. iv. 1-7.</l>
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
<l>σαββάτῳ κϛ´    Gal. iii. 8-12.</l>
<l>Κυριακῇ κϛ´    Eph. v. 8-19.</l>
<l>σαββάτῳ κζ´       Gal. v. 22-vi. 2.</l>
<l>Κυριακῇ κζ´       Eph. vi. 10-17.</l>
<l>σαββάτῳ κη´       Col. i. 9-18.</l>
<l>Κυριακῇ κη´       2 Cor. ii. 14-iii. 3.</l>
<l>σαββάτῳ κθ´      Eph. ii. 11-13.</l>
<l>Κυριακῇ κθ´      Col. iii. 4-11.</l>
<l>σαββάτῳ λ´        Eph. v. 1-8.</l>
<l>Κυριακῇ λ´        Col. iii. 12-16.</l>
<l>σαββάτῳ λα´       Col. i. 2-6.</l>
<l>Κυριακῇ λα´       2 Tim. i. 3-9.</l>
<l>σαββάτῳ λβ´       Col. ii. 8-12.</l>
<l>Κυριακῇ λβ´       1 Tim. vi. 11-16.</l>
<l>σαββάτῳ λγ´       1 Tim. ii. 1-7.</l>
<l>Κυριακῇ λγ´       as Κυρ. λα´. (2 Tim. i. 3-9 in B-C. III. 24).</l>
<l>σαββάτῳ λδ´       1 Tim. iii. 13-iv. 5.</l>
<l>Κυριακῇ λδ´       2 Tim. iii. 10-15.</l>
<l>σαββάτῳ λε´       1 Tim. iv. 9-15.</l>
<l>Κυριακῇ λε´       2 Tim. ii. 1-10.</l>
<l>σαββάτῳ λϛ´    2 Tim. ii. 11-19.</l>
</lg>

</div>

<div>
<head>On The Menology, Or Calendar Of Immoveable Festivals And
Saints' Days.</head>

<p>
We cannot in this place enter very fully into this portion of the contents of
Lectionaries, inasmuch as, for reasons we have assigned above, the investigation
would be both tedious and difficult. All the great feast-days, however, as well as
the commemorations of the Apostles and of a few other Saints, occur alike in all the
books, and ought not to be omitted here. We commence with the month of September
(the opening of the year at Constantinople), as do all the Lectionaries and Synaxaria
we have seen<note place='foot'>In the Menology, even Arund. 547 has μηνὶ σεπτεμβρίῳ <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>α</hi>; ἀρχὴ τῆς ἰνδίκτου. So Burn. 22 nearly.</note>.
</p>

<p>
Sept. 1. Simeon Stylites, Luke iv. 16-22;
Col. iii. 12-16 (1 Tim. ii. 1-7, B-C.
III. 53).
</p>

<p>
2. John the Faster, Matt. v. 14-19
(Wake 12). (John xv. 1-11, Parham
18.)
</p>

<p>
8. Birthday of the Virgin, Θεοτόκος,
Matins, Luke i. 39-49, 56 (B-C. III.
24 and 42). Liturgy, Luke x. 38-42;
xi. 27, 28; Phil. ii. 5-11.
Κυριακῇ πρὸ τῆς ὑψώσεως, John iii.
13-17; Gal. vi. 11-18.
</p>

<p>
14. Elevation of the Cross, Matins, John
xii. 28-36. Liturgy, John xix. 6-35
(diff. in K and some others); 1 Cor.
i. 18-24.
</p>

<p>
σαββάτῳ μετὰ τὴν ὕψωσιν, John viii. 21-30;
1 Cor. i. 26-29.
Κυριακῇ μετὰ τὴν ὕψωσιν  Mark viii. 34-ix. 1;
Gal. ii. 16-20.
</p>

<p>
18. Theodora<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Theodosia</hi> in Codex Cyprius (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>), with the cognate lesson, Luke vii. 36-50, which lesson is read
in Gale for Sept. 16, Euphemia and in Evst. 261 (B.M. Addit. 11,840). In Burdett-Coutts II. 7, John viii.
3-11 is used εἰς μετανοοῦντας: B-C. II. 30 adds καὶ γυναικῶν.</note>, John viii. 3-11 (Parham).
</p>

<p>
24. Thecla, Matt. xxv. 1-13; 2 Tim. i.
3-9.
</p>

<p>
Oct. 3. Dionysius the Areopagite, Matt.
xiii. 45-54; Acts xvii. 16 (19, Cod.
Bezae)-34 (16-23, 30, B-C, III. 24)
(diff. in K).
</p>

<p>
6. Thomas the Apostle, John xx. 19-31;
1 Cor. iv. 9-16.
</p>

<p>
8. Pelagia, John viii. 3-11<note place='foot'>So Cod. Cyprius, but the Christ's Coll. Evst. removes Pelagia to Aug. 31, and reads John viii. 1-11.</note>.
</p>

<p>
9. James son of Alphaeus, Matt. x.
1-7, 14, 15.
</p>

<p>
18. Luke the Evangelist, Luke x. 16-21;
Col. iv. 5-9, 14, 18.
</p>

<p>
23. James, ὁ ἀδελφόθεος, Mark vi. 1-7;
James i. 1-12.
</p>

<p>
Nov. 8. Michael and Archangels, Matins,
Matt, xviii. 10-20. Liturgy, Luke
x. 16-21; Heb. ii. 2-10.
</p>

<p>
13. Chrysostom, Matins, John x. 1-9.
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
Liturgy, John x. 9-16; Heb. vii. 26-viii.
2.
</p>

<p>
Nov. 14. Philip the Apostle, John i.
44-55; Acts viii. 26-39.
</p>

<p>
16. Matthew the Apostle, Matt. ix.
9-13; 1 Cor. iv. 9-16.
</p>

<p>
17. Gregory Thaumaturgus, Matt. x.
1-10 (Wake 12); 1 Cor. xii. 7, 8,
10, 11.
</p>

<p>
25. Clement of Rome, John xv. 17-xvi.
1; Phil. iii. 20-iv. 3.
</p>

<p>
30. Andrew the Apostle, John i. 35-52;
1 Cor. iv. 9-16.
</p>

<p>
Dec. 20. Ignatius, ὁ θεόφορος, Mark ix.
33-41; Heb. iv. 14-v. 6 (Rom. viii.
28-39, B-C. III. 24).
</p>

<p>
Saturday before Christmas, Matt. xiii.
31-58 (Luke xiii. 19-29, Gale); Gal.
iii. 8-12.
</p>

<p>
Sunday before Christmas, Matt. i. 1-25;
Heb. xi. 9-16 (9, 10, 32-40,
B-C. III. 24).
</p>

<p>
24. Christmas Eve, Luke ii. 1-20;
Heb. i. 1-12. Προεόρτια, 1 Pet. ii.
10 (B-C. III. 24).
</p>

<p>
25. Christmas Day, Matins, Matt. i.
18-25. Liturgy, Matt. ii. 1-12; Gal.
iv. 4-7.
</p>

<p>
26. εἰς τὴν  σύναξιν τῆς Θεοτόκου, Matt. ii.
13-23; Heb. ii. 11-18.
</p>

<p>
27. Stephen<note place='foot'>The Proto-martyr Stephen is commemorated on August 2 in Evst. 3 (Wheeler 3).</note>, Matt. xxi. 33-42 (Gale);
Acts vi. 1-7.
</p>

<p>
Saturday after Christmas, Matt. xii.
15-21; 1 Tim. vi. 11-16.
</p>

<p>
Sunday after Christmas, Mark i. 1-8;
Gal. i. 11-19. The same Lessons for
</p>

<p>
29. Innocents (Gale).
Saturday πρὸ τῶν φώτων, Matt. iii. 1-6;
1 Tim. iii. 13-iv. 5.
</p>

<p>
Sunday πρὸ τῶν φώτων, Mark i. 1-8;
1 Tim. iii. 13-iv. 5 (2 Tim. iv. 5-8,
B-C. III. 24).
</p>

<p>
Jan. 1. Circumcision, Luke ii. 20, 21,
40-52; 1 Cor. xiii. 12-xiv. 5.
</p>

<p>
5. Vigil of θεοφανία, Luke iii. 1-18;
1 Cor. ix. 19-x. 4.
</p>

<p>
6. Θεοφανία (Epiphany) Matins, Mark i. 9-11. Titus ii.
11-14 (B-C. III. 42 adds iii. 4-7).
Liturgy, Matt. iii. 13-17.
</p>

<p>
7. John, ὁ πρόδρομος, John i. 29-34.
</p>

<p>
Saturday μετὰ τὰ φῶτα, Matt. iv. 1-11;
Eph. vi. 10-17.
</p>

<p>
Sunday μετὰ τὰ φῶτα, Matt. iv. 12-17;
Eph. iv. 7-13.
</p>

<p>
16. Peter ad <hi rend='italic'>Vincula</hi>, John xxi. 15-19
(B-C. III. 42).
</p>

<p>
22. Timothy, Matt. x. 32, 33, 37, 38;
xix. 27-30; 2 Tim. i. 3-9.
</p>

<p>
Feb. 2. Presentation of Christ, Matins,
Luke ii. 25-32. Liturgy, Luke ii.
22-40; Heb. vii. 7-17.
</p>

<p>
3. Simeon ὁ θεοδόχος and Anna, Luke
ii. 25-38; Heb. ix. 11-14.
</p>

<p>
23. Polycarp, John xii. 24-36,
</p>

<p>
24. Finding of the Head of John the Baptist.
Matins, Luke vii. 18-29 (17-30, B-C. iii. 42).
Liturgy, Matt. xi. 5-14; 2 Cor. iv. 6-11.
</p>

<p>
March 24. Vigil of Annunciation, Luke
i. 39-56 (Gale).
</p>

<p>
25. Annunciation, Luke i. 24-38; Heb.
ii. 11-18.
</p>

<p>
April 23. St. George, Matins, Mark xiii.
9-13. Liturgy, Acts xii. 1-11 (Cod.
Bezae)<note place='foot'>The same Saint is commemorated in the fragment of a Golden Evangelistarium seen at Sinai by the
Rev. E. M. Young in 1864, and in B-C. III. 42 as μεγαλόμαρτυς ὁ τροπαιοφόρος; which (Evst. 286) is
described in its place below.</note>.
</p>

<p>
25. (Oct. 19, B-C. III. 24). Mark the
Evangelist, Mark vi. 7-13; Col. iv.
5, 10, 11, 18.
</p>

<p>
30. James, son of Zebedee, Matt. x.
1-7, 14, 15.
</p>

<p>
May 2. Athanasius, Matt. v. 14-19; Heb.
iv. 14.-v. 6.
</p>

<p>
8. (Sept. 26, B-C. III. 42). John, ὁ
θεόλογος, John xix. 25-27; xxi. 24,
25; 1 John i. 1-7 (iv. 12-19, B-C.
III. 42).
</p>

<p>
21. Helena, Luke iv. 22, &amp;c., Evst. 298.
</p>

<p>
26. Jude the Apostle, John xiv. 21-24.
</p>

<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>

<p>
June 11. Bartholomew and Barnabas the
Apostles, Mark vi. 7-13; Acts xi.
19-30.
</p>

<p>
19. Jude, brother of the Lord, Mark vi.
7-13, or εὐαγγέλιον ἀποστολικόν (Matt.
x. 1-8? June 30).
</p>

<p>
24. Birth of John the Baptist, Luke i.
1-25; 57-80; Rom. xiii. 11-xiv. 4.
</p>

<p>
29. Peter and Paul the Apostles, Matins,
John xxi. 15-31. Liturgy, Matt. xvi.
13-19; 2 Cor. xi. 21-xii. 9.
</p>

<p>
30. The Twelve Apostles, Matt. x. 1-8.
July 20. Elijah, Luke iv. 22, &amp;c., Evst.
229.
</p>

<p>
22. Mary Magdalene, ἡ μυροφόρος, Mark
xvi. 9-20; 2 Tim. ii. 1-10.
</p>

<p>
Aug. 1. τῶν ἁγίων μακκαβαίων, Matt. x.
16, &amp;c., Evst. 228 and others.
</p>

<p>
Aug. 6. Transfiguration.
Matins, Luke ix. 29-36  or Mark ix. 2-9.
Liturgy, Matt. xvii. 1-9; 2 Pet. i. 10-19.
</p>

<p>
15. Assumption of the Virgin, Luke x.
38-42 (Gale, Codex Bezae).
</p>

<p>
20. Thaddaeus the Apostle, Matt. x.
16-22; 1 Cor. iv. 9-16.
</p>

<p>
25. Titus, Matt. v. 14-19 (Gale); 2 Tim.
ii. 1-10.
</p>

<p>
29. Beheading of John the Baptist,
Matins, Matt. xiv. 1-13. Liturgy,
Mark vi. 14-30; Acts xiii. 25-32
(39, B-C. III. 24).
</p>

<p>
Εἰς τὰ ἐγκαίνια, Dedication, John x. 22
(17, Gale)&mdash;28 (Gale, Cod. Bezae);
2 Cor. v. 15-21: Heb. ix. 1-7.
</p>

<p>
At Cambridge (Univ. Libr. II. 28. 8) is a rare volume containing the Greek Gospel
Church-Lessons, Θεῖον καὶ ἱερὸν εὐαγγέλιον, Venice, 1615-24, once belonging to Bishop
Hacket: also the Apostolos of a smaller size. Another edition appeared in 1851,
also at Venice.
</p>

<p>
For a comparison of the Greek with the Coptic Calendar, see p. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, note 2. For
the Menology in the Jerusalem Syriac Lectionary, see Vol. II, Chap. 1.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Chapter_IV'/>
<head>Chapter IV. The Larger Uncial Manuscripts Of The Greek Testament.</head>

<p>
We proceed to describe in detail the uncial manuscripts of
the Greek Testament, arranged separately as copies of the
Gospels, of the Acts and Catholic Epistles, of the Pauline
Epistles, and of the Apocalypse. They are usually indicated
by the capital letters of the English and Greek alphabets, and
stand on the list not in the order of their relative value or
antiquity, but mainly as they were applied from time to time
to the purposes of Textual criticism.
</p>

<p>
א (<hi rend='italic'>Aleph</hi>). <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Sinaiticus</hi>, now at St. Petersburg, the
justly celebrated copy which sometime ago for a quarter of a century
attracted general attention in the learned world. Tischendorf
(Notitia Ed. Cod. Sinaitici, pp. 5, 6) when travelling in
1844 under the patronage of his own sovereign, King Frederick
Augustus of Saxony, picked out of a basket full of papers destined
to light the oven of the Convent of St. Catherine on Mount
Sinai, the forty-three leaves of the Septuagint which he published
in 1846 as the Codex Friderico-Augustanus (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>). These,
of course, he easily got for the asking, but finding that further
portions of the same codex (e.g. the whole of Isaiah and 1, 4
Maccabees) were extant, he rescued them from their probable
fate, by enlightening the brotherhood as to their value. He was
permitted to copy one page of what yet remained, containing
the end of Isaiah and the beginning of Jeremiah, which he
afterwards published in the first volume of his <q>Monumenta Sacra
Inedita</q> (1855), pp. xxx. and 213-16; and he departed in the
full hope that he should be allowed to purchase the whole. But
he had taught the monks a sharp lesson, and neither then, nor
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
on his subsequent visit in 1853, could he gain any tidings of the
leaves he had left behind;&mdash;he even seems to have concluded
that they had been carried into Europe by some richer or more
fortunate collector. At the beginning of 1859, after the care of
the seventh edition of his N. T. was happily over, he went for a
third time into the East, under the well-deserved patronage of
the Emperor of Russia, the great protector of the Oriental
Church; and the treasure which had been twice withdrawn
from him as a private traveller, was now, on the occasion of
some chance conversation, spontaneously put into the hands of one
sent from the champion and benefactor of the oppressed Church.
Tischendorf touchingly describes his surprise, his joy, his midnight
studies over the priceless volume (<q><foreign rend='italic'>quippe dormire nefas
videbatur</foreign></q>) on that memorable 4th of February, 1859. The
rest was easy; he was allowed to copy his prize at Cairo, and
ultimately to bring it to Europe, as a tribute of duty and
gratitude to the Emperor Alexander II. To that monarch's wise
munificence both the larger edition (1862), and the smaller of the
New Testament only (1863), are mainly due.
</p>

<p>
The Codex Sinaiticus is 13-½ inches in length by 14-7/8 inches
high, and consists of 346-½ leaves of the same beautiful vellum
as the Cod. Friderico-Augustanus which is really a part of it
whereof 199 contain portions of the Septuagint version, 147-½
the whole New Testament, Barnabas' Epistle, and a considerable
fragment of Hermas' Shepherd. It has subsequently
appeared that the Russian Archimandrite (afterwards Bishop)
Porphyry had brought with him from Sinai in 1845 some pieces of
Genesis xxiii, xxiv, and of Numbers v, vi, and vii, which had been
applied long before to the binding of other books<note place='foot'>These fragments were published by Tischendorf in his Appendix Codd.
cel. Sin. Vat. Alex. 1867. They consist of Gen. xxiii. 19-xxiv. 4; 5-8; 10-14;
17, 18; 25-27; 30-33; 36-41; 43-46; Num. v. 26-30; vi. 5, 6, 11, 12, 17, 18;
22-27; vii. 4, 5, 12, 13; 15-26. Another leaf of the same manuscript, containing
Lev. xxii. 3-xxiii. 22, was also found at Sinai by Dr. H. Brügsch Bey, of
Göttingen, and published by him in his Neue Bruchstücke des Codex Sinaiticus
aufgefunden in der Bibliothek des Sinai Klosters, 1875, but is not, after all,
part of Cod. א. Another morsel, containing Gen. xxiv. 9, 10, and 41-43, now
at St. Petersburg, really belongs to it.</note>. Each page
comprises four columns (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>), with forty-eight lines in each
column, of those continuous, noble, simple uncials (<hi rend='italic'>compare</hi> Plate
<ref target='Plate_IV'>iv</ref>. 11 a <hi rend='italic'>with</hi> 11 b). The poetical books of the Old Testament,
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
however, being written in στίχοι, admit of only two columns
on a page (<hi rend='italic'>above</hi>, p. <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>). <q>In the Catholic Epistles the scribe
has frequently contented himself with a column of forty-seven
lines<note place='foot'>J. Rendel Harris, New Testament Autographs, Baltimore (without date),
an original and ingenious contribution to textual criticism; as is the Origin of
the Leicester Codex (1887) Camb. Synd. by the same author, Fellow of Clare
College, and Reader in Palaeography at Cambridge. Curious results in Bradshaw's
spirit. Identity of hand with Caius Psalter.</note>.</q> The order of the sacred books is remarkable, though
by no means unprecedented. St. Paul's Epistles precede the
Acts, and amongst them, that to the Hebrews follows 2 Thess.,
standing on the same page with it (p. 74). Although this manuscript
has hitherto been inspected by few Englishmen (Tregelles,
however, and Dean Stanley were among the number),
yet its general aspect has grown familiar to us by the means of
photographs of its most important pages taken for the use of
private scholars<note place='foot'>Abbot, Comparative Antiquity of the Sinaitic and Vatican Manuscripts,
p. 195. Dean Burgon surrendered the position maintained in The Last Twelve
Verses of St. Mark.</note>, as well as from the facsimiles contained in
Tischendorf's several editions. Breathings and accents there
are none except in Tobit vi. 9, and Gal. v. 21, as has been
already mentioned: the apostrophus and the single point for
punctuation are entirely absent for pages together, yet
occasionally are rather thickly studded, not only in places
where a later hand has been unusually busy (e.g. Isaiah
i. 1-iii. 2, two pages), but in some others (e.g. in 2 Cor. xii. 20
there are eight stops). Even words very usually abridged
(except <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>θσ</hi>, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>κσ</hi>, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ισ</hi>, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>χσ</hi>, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>πνα</hi> which are constant) are here written in
full though the practice varies, πατηρ, υιος, ουρανος, ανθρωπος,
δαυειδ: we find ϊσραηλ´, ισλ or <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ιηλ</hi>: ϊερουσαλημ´, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ιημ</hi>, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ιλμ</hi>, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ιηλμ´</hi>.
Tischendorf considers the two points over iota and upsilon
(which are sometimes wanting) as seldom from the first hand:
the mark &gt;, besides its rather rare marginal use in citations
(<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, note 4), we notice in the text oftener in the Old
Testament than in the New. Words are divided at the end
of a line: thus Κ in ΟΥΚ, and Χ in ΟΥΧ are separated<note place='foot'>It has been suggested that this strange mode of division originated in the
reluctance of scribes to begin a new line with any combination of letters which
could not commence a Greek word, and to end a line with any letter which is
not a vowel, or a liquid, or σ, or γ before another consonant, except in the case
of Proper Names (Journal of Sacred Literature, April 1863, p. 8). Certainly
the general practice in Cod. א bears out the rule thus laid down, though a few
instances to the contrary occur here and there (Scrivener, Collation of Cod.
Sinaiticus, Introd. p. xiv, note). Hort refers it to a grammatical rule not to
end a line with οὐκ or οὐχ, or a consonant preceding an elided vowel, as ἀπ᾽, οὐδ᾽.
New Testament in Greek, p. 315.</note>. Small
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
letters, of the most perfect shape, freely occur in all places,
especially at the end of lines, where the <emph>superscript</emph> (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>)
is almost always made to represent Ν (e.g. seventeen times in
Mark i. 1-35). Other <foreign rend='italic'>compendia scribendi</foreign> are Κ for και, and ΗΝ
written as in Plate <ref target='Plate_I'>i</ref>. No. 2<note place='foot'>But ΜΗ, ΝΗ, for μη, νη occur even in the Septuagint Cod. Sarravianus,
also of the fourth century, in which copy numerals are quite constantly expressed
by letters.</note>. Numerals are represented by
letters, with a straight line placed over them, e.g. <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>μ</hi> Mark i. 13.
Although there are no capitals, the initial letter of a line which
begins a paragraph generally (not always) stands out from the
rank of the rest, as in the Old Testament portion of Cod. Vaticanus,
and less frequently in the New, after the fashion of
certain earlier pieces on papyrus. The titles and subscriptions
of the several books are as short as possible (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>).
The τίτλοι or κεφάλαια <foreign rend='italic'>majora</foreign> are absent; the margin contains
the so-called Ammonian sections and Eusebian canons,
but Tischendorf is positive that neither they nor such notes as
στιχων <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ρπ</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, note 3) appended to 2 Thessalonians,
are by the original scribe, although they may possibly be due
to a contemporary hand. From the number of ὁμοιοτέλευτα
and other errors, one cannot affirm that it is very carefully
written. Its itacisms are of the oldest type, and those not constant;
chiefly ι for ει, and δε and ε, and much more rarely η
and υ and οι interchanged. The grammatical forms commonly
termed Alexandrian occur, pretty much as in other manuscripts
of the earliest date. The whole manuscript is disfigured by
corrections, a few by the original scribe, or by the usual comparer
or διορθώτης (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>); very many by an ancient and
elegant hand of the sixth century (א<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>), whose emendations are of
great importance; some again by a hand but little later (א<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>);
far the greatest number by a scholar of the seventh century
(א<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>c</hi>), who often cancels the changes introduced by (א<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>); others
by as many as eight several later writers, whose varying
styles Tischendorf has carefully discriminated and illustrated by
facsimiles<note place='foot'>Tischendorf, however, describes א<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi> as <q>et formis et atramento primam
manum tantum non adaequans,</q> and its writer has been regarded by some as
little inferior in value to the first scribe. Thus Dr. Hort (Introd. p. 271), calling
him the <q>corrector</q> proper, states that he <q>made use of an excellent exemplar,
and the readings which he occasionally uses take high rank as authority.</q> Hort
considers א<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi> as mixed, א<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>c</hi> as still more so.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>

<p>
The foregoing considerations were bringing even cautious
students to a general conviction that Cod. א, if not, as its enthusiastic
discoverer had announced, <q>omnium antiquissimus</q>
in the absolute sense of the words, was yet but little lower in
date than the Vatican manuscript itself, and a veritable relic of
the middle of the fourth century&mdash;the presence in its margin of
the sections and canons of Eusebius [d. 340?], by a hand nearly
if not quite contemporaneous, seems to preclude the notion of
higher antiquity<note place='foot'><p>I am indebted for the following Memoranda on Cod. א to the kindness of the
Dean of Derry and Raphoe.
</p>
<p>
i. It is demonstrable that the Eusebian Sections and Canons on the margin
are contemporaneous with the text. For they are wanting from leaves 10 and
15. Now these leaves are conjugate; and they have been (on other grounds)
noted by Tischendorf as written not by the scribe of the body of the N. T., but by
one of his colleagues (<q>D</q>) who wrote part of the O. T. and acted as Diorthota
of the N. T. It thus appears that, after the marginal numbers had been
inserted, the sheet containing leaves 10 and 15 was cancelled, and rewritten by
a contemporary hand. The numbers must therefore have been written before
the MS. was completed and issued.
</p>
<p>
ii. The exemplar whence these numbers were derived, differed considerably
from that which the text follows. For, in some cases, the sectional numbers
indicate the presence of passages which are absent from the text. E.g. St. Matt.
xvi. 2, 3, which is sect. 162, is wanting; and 162 is assigned to ver. 4, while the
wrong canon (5 for 6) betrays the presence in the canonizer's exemplar of the
passage omitted by the scribe. The same is true of St. Mark xv. 28 (in which case
the scribe is <q>D</q>).
</p>
<p>
iii. The scribe who wrote the text was unacquainted with the Eusebian sections.
For the beginning of a section is not marked, as in A and most subsequent MSS.,
by a division of the text and a larger letter. On the contrary the text is divided
into paragraphs quite independent of the Eusebian divisions, which often begin
in the middle of a line, and are marked merely by two dots (:) in vermilion,
inserted no doubt by the rubricator as he entered the numbers in the margin.
The fact that the numbers of the sections as well as of the canons (not as in
other MSS. of the Canons only) are in vermilion, points the same way.
</p>
<p>
iv. From the above it follows, (1) That while Cod. א proves the absence from
its exemplar of certain passages, its margin proves the presence of some of them
in a contemporaneous exemplar; (2) that while on the one hand the Eusebian
numbers, coeval with the text, show that the MS. cannot be dated before the
time of Eusebius, on the other hand the form of the text, inasmuch as it is
not arranged so as to suit them, and as it differs from the text implied in them,
marks for it a date little, if at all, after his time&mdash;certainly many years earlier
than A.
</p>
<p>
v. As regards the omission of the verses of St. Mark xvi. 9-20, it is not correct to
assert that Cod. א betrays no sign of consciousness of their existence. For the
last line of ver. 8, containing only the letters τογαρ, has the rest of the space
(more than half the width of the column) filled up with a minute and elaborate
<q>arabesque</q> executed with the pen in ink and vermilion, nothing like which
occurs anywhere else in the whole MS. (O. T. or N. T.), such spaces being
elsewhere invariably left blank. By this careful filling up of the blank, the
scribe (who here is the diorthota <q>D</q>), distinctly shows that the omission
is not a case of <q>non-interpolation,</q> but of deliberate excision. John Gwynn,
May 21, 1883.</p></note>&mdash;when Constantino Simonides, a Greek of
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
Syme, who had just edited a few papyrus fragments of the
New Testament alleged to have been written in the first
century of the Christian era, suddenly astonished the learned
world in 1862 by claiming to be himself the scribe who had
penned this manuscript in the monastery of Panteleemon on
Mount Athos, as recently as in the years 1839 and 1840.
The writer of these pages must refer to the Introduction to his
Collation of the Codex Sinaiticus (pp. lx-lxxii, 2nd edition,
1867) for a statement of the reasons which have been universally
accepted as conclusive, why the manuscript which
Simonides may very well have written under the circumstances
he has described neither was nor possibly could be that venerable
document. The discussion of the whole question, however,
though painful enough in some aspects, was the means of
directing attention to certain peculiarities of Cod. א which
might otherwise have been overlooked. While engaged in
demonstrating that it could not have been transcribed from a
Moscow-printed Bible, as was <q>Cod. Simoneidos</q> (to borrow the
designation employed by its author), critics came to perceive
that either this copy or its immediate prototype must have
been derived from a papyrus exemplar, and that probably of
Egyptian origin (Collation, &amp;c. pp. viii; xiv; lxviii), a confirmation
of the impression conveyed to the reader by a first
glance at the eight narrow columns of each open leaf (p. 28).
The claim of Simonides to be the sole writer of a book which
must have consisted when complete of about 730 leaves, or
1460 pages of very large size (Collation, &amp;c. p. xxxii), and that
too within the compass of eight or ten months<note place='foot'>He would have written about 20,000 separate uncial letters every day.
Compare the performance of that veritable Briareus, Nicodemus ὁ ξένος, who
transcribed the Octateuch (in cursive characters certainly) now at Ferrara
(Holmes, Cod. 107), beginning his task on the 8th of June, and finishing it
the 15th of July, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1334, <q>working very hard</q>&mdash;as he must have done indeed
(Burgon, <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, Jan. 29, 1873).</note> (he inscribed on
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
his finished work, as he tells us, the words Σιμωνίδου τὸ ὅλον
ἔργον), made it important to scrutinize the grounds of Tischendorf's
judgement that four several scribes had been engaged
upon it, one of whom, as he afterwards came to persuade himself,
was the writer of its rival, Codex Vaticanus<note place='foot'>This opinion, first put forth by Tischendorf in his N. T. Vaticanum 1867,
Proleg. pp. xxi-xxiii, was minutely discussed in the course of a review of that
book in the <hi rend='italic'>Christian Remembrancer</hi>, October 1867, by the writer of these pages.
Although Dr. Hort labours to show that no critical inferences ought to be
drawn from this identity of the scribe of Cod. B with the writer of six conjugate
leaves of Cod. א (being three pairs in three distinct quires, one of them containing
the conclusion of St. Mark's Gospel), he is constrained to admit that
<q>the fact appears to be sufficiently established by concurrent peculiarities in
the form of one letter, punctuation, avoidance of contractions, and some points
of orthography</q> (Introduction, p. 213). The internal evidence indeed, though
relating to minute matters, is cumulative and irresistible, and does not seem
to have been noticed by Tischendorf, who drew his conclusions from the
handwriting only.</note>. Such an
investigation, so far as it depends only on the handwriting, can
scarcely be carried out satisfactorily without actual examination
of the manuscript itself, which is unfortunately not easily
within the reach of those who could use it independently; but
it is at all events quite plain, as well from internal considerations
as from minute peculiarities in the writing, such as the
frequent use of the apostrophus and of the mark &gt; (<hi rend='italic'>see above</hi>,
p. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>) on some sheets and their complete absence from others
(Collation, &amp;c. pp. xvi-xviii; xxxii; xxxvii), that at least
two, and probably more, persons have been employed on the
several parts of the volume<note place='foot'>Prothero (Memoir of H. Bradshaw, pp. 92-118) reprints a letter of Bradshaw
from <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, Jan. 28, 1863, worth studying:&mdash;<q>Simonides died hard, and to the
very end was supported by a few dupes of his ingenious mendacity.</q> (p. 99.)</note>.
</p>

<p>
It is indeed a strange coincidence, although unquestionably it
can be nothing more, that Simonides should have brought to the
West from Mount Athos some years before one genuine fragment
of the Shepherd of Hermas in Greek, and the transcript of
a second (both of which materially aided Tischendorf in editing
the remains of that Apostolic Father), when taken in connexion
with the fact that the worth of Codex Sinaiticus is vastly
enhanced by its exhibiting next to the Apocalypse, and on the
same page with its conclusion, the only complete extant copy,
besides the one discovered by Bryennios in 1875, of the Epistle of
Barnabas in Greek, followed by a considerable portion of this
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
self-same Shepherd of Hermas, much of which, as well as of
Barnabas, was previously known to us only in the Old Latin
translation. Both these works are included in the list of books
of the New Testament contained in the great Codex Claromontanus
D of St. Paul's Epistles, to be described hereafter, Barnabas
standing there in an order sufficiently remarkable; and their
presence, like that of the Epistles of Clement at the end of
Codex Alexandrinus (p. <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>), brings us back to a time when
the Church had not yet laid aside the primitive custom of reading
publicly in the congregation certain venerated writings
which have never been regarded exactly in the same light as
Holy Scripture itself. Between the end of Barnabas and
the opening of the Shepherd are lost the last six leaves of
a quaternion (which usually consists of eight) numbered 91
at its head in a fairly ancient hand. The limited space would
not suffice for the insertion of Clement's genuine Epistle, since
the head of the next quaternion is numbered 92, but might suit
one of the other uncanonical books on the list in Cod. Claromontanus,
viz. the Acts of Paul and the Revelation of Peter.
</p>

<p>
With regard to the deeply interesting question as to the critical
character of Cod. א, although it strongly supports the Codex
Vaticanus in many characteristic readings, yet it cannot be said
to give its exclusive adherence to any of the witnesses hitherto
examined. It so lends its grave authority, now to one and now
to another, as to convince us more than ever of the futility of
seeking to derive the genuine text of the New Testament from
any one copy, however ancient and, on the whole, trustworthy,
when evidence of a wide and varied character is at hand.
</p>

<p>
A. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Alexandrinus</hi> in the British Museum, where the
open volume of the New Testament is publicly shown in the
Manuscript room. It was placed in that Library on its formation
in 1753, having previously belonged to the king's private
collection from the year 1628, when Cyril Lucar, Patriarch of
Constantinople (whose crude attempts to reform the Eastern
Church on the model of Geneva ultimately provoked the untoward
Synod of Bethlehem in 1672<note place='foot'>A more favourable estimate of the ecclesiastical policy of Cyril (who was
murdered by order of the Sultan in 1638, aet. 80) is maintained by Dr. Th. Smith,
<q>Collectanea de Cyrillo Lucario, Patriarcha Constantinopolitano,</q> London 1707.</note>), sent this most precious
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
document by our Ambassador in Turkey, Sir Thomas Roe,
as a truly royal gift to Charles I. An Arabic inscription,
several centuries old, at the back of the Table of Contents on
the first leaf of the manuscript, and translated into Latin in
another hand, which Mr. W. Aldis Wright recognizes as Bentley's
(Academy, April 17, 1875), states that it was written by the
hand of Thecla the Martyr<note place='foot'>I.e. <q>Memorant hunc Librum scriptū fuisse ma-nu Theclae Martyris.</q> On
the page over against Cyril's note the same hand writes <q>videantur literae ejusdé
Cyrill: Lucar: ad Georgium Episco Cant</q> [Abbot]; <hi rend='italic'>Harl</hi>: 823, 2. quae extant
in Clementis Epistolis ad Corinthios editionis Colomesii Lond. 1687 8<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>o</hi> page
354 &amp;c.</note>. A recent Latin note on the first
page of the first of two fly-leaves declares that it was given
to the Patriarchal Chamber in the year of the Martyrs, 814
[<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1098]. Another, and apparently the earliest inscription, in
an obscure Moorish-Arabic scrawl, set at the foot of the first page
of Genesis, was thus translated for Baber by Professor Nicoll of
Oxford, <q>Dicatus est Cellae Patriarchae in urbe munitâ Alexandriâ.
Qui eum ex eâ extraxerit sit anathematizatus, vi avulsus.
Athanasius humilis</q> (Cod. Alex. V.T., Prolegomena, p. xxvi,
note 92). That the book was brought from Alexandria by Cyril
(who had been Patriarch of that see from 1602 to 1621) need
not be disputed, although Wetstein, on the doubtful authority of
Matthew Muttis of Cyprus, Cyril's deacon, concludes that he
procured it from Mount Athos. In the volume itself the
Patriarch has written and subscribed the following words:
<q>Liber iste scripturae sacrae N. et V. Testamenti, prout ex
traditione habemus, est scriptus manu Theclae, nobilis foeminae
Aegyptiae, ante mile [sic] et trecentos annos circiter, paulò post
Concilium Nicenum. Nomen Theclae in fine libri erat exaratum,
sed extincto Christianismo in Aegypto a Mahometanis, et libri
unà Christianorum in similem sunt reducti conditionem. Extinctum
ergo est Theclae nomen et laceratum, sed memoria et
traditio recens observat.</q> Cyril seems to lean wholly on the
Arabic inscription on the first leaf of the volume: independent
testimony he would appear to have received none.
</p>

<p>
This celebrated manuscript, the earliest of first-rate importance
applied by scholars to the criticism of the text, and yielding
in value to but one or two at the utmost, is now bound in
four volumes, whereof three contain the Septuagint version of
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
the Old Testament almost complete<note place='foot'>Not to mention a few casual <foreign rend='italic'>lacunae</foreign> here and there, especially in the early
leaves of the manuscript, the lower part of one leaf has been cut out, so that
Gen. xiv. 14-17; xv. 1-5; 16-20; xvi. 6-9 are wanting. The leaf containing
1 Sam. xii. 20-xiv. 9, and the nine leaves containing Ps. 1. 20-lxxx. 10 (Engl.)
are lost.</note>, the fourth volume the New
Testament with several lamentable defects. In St. Matthew's
Gospel some twenty-five leaves are wanting up to ch. xxv. 6
ἐξέρχεσθε, from John vi. 50 ἵνα to viii. 52 καὶ σύ<note place='foot'>Yet we may be sure that these two leaves did not contain the Pericope
Adulterae, John vii. 58-viii. 11. Taking the Elzevir N. T. of 1624, which is
printed without breaks for the verses, we count 286 lines of the Elzevir for the
two leaves of Cod. A preceding its defect, 288 lines for the two which follow
it; but 317 lines for the two missing leaves. Deduct the thirty lines containing
John vii. 53-viii. 11, and the result for the lost leaves is 287.</note> two leaves are
lost, and three leaves from 2 Cor. iv. 13 ἐπίστευσα to xii. 6 ἐξ
ἐμοῦ. All the other books of the New Testament are here entire,
the Catholic Epistles following the Acts, that to the Hebrews
standing before the Pastoral Epistles (<hi rend='italic'>see above</hi>, p. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>). After
the Apocalypse we find what was till very recently the only
known extant copy of the first or genuine Epistle of Clement of
Rome, and a small fragment of a second of suspected authenticity,
both in the same hand as the latter part of the New Testament.
It would appear also that these two Epistles of Clement were
designed to form a part of the volume of Scripture, for in the
Table of Contents exhibited on the first leaf of the manuscript
under the head Η ΚΑΙΝΗ ΔΙΑΘΗΚΗ, they are represented as
immediately following the Apocalypse: next is given the number
of books, ΟΜΟΥ ΒΙΒΛΙΑ, the numerals being now illegible;
and after this, as if distinct from Scripture, the eighteen Psalms
of Solomon. Such uncanonical works (ἰδιωτικοὶ ψαλμοὶ ... ἀκανόνιστα
βιβλία) were forbidden to be read in churches by the
59th canon of the Council of Laodicea (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 363?); whose 60th
canon, which seems to have been added a little later, enumerates
the books of the N. T. in the precise order seen in Cod. A,
only that the Apocalypse and Clement's Epistles do not stand
on the list.
</p>

<p>
This manuscript is in quarto, 12-¾ inches high and 10-¼ broad,
and consists of 773 leaves (of which 639 contain the Old Testament),
each page being divided into two columns of fifty or
fifty-one lines each, having about twenty letters or upwards in
a line. These letters are written continuously in uncial characters,
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
without any space between the words, the uncials being
of an elegant yet simple form, in a firm and uniform hand,
though in some places larger than in others. Specimens of
both styles may be seen in our facsimiles (Plate <ref target='Plate_V'>v</ref>, Nos. 12, 13)<note place='foot'>An excellent facsimile of A is given in the Facsimiles of the Palaeographical
Society, Plate 106; others in Woide's New Testament from this MS. (1786), and in
Baber's Old Test. (1816). Two specimens from the first Epistle of Clement are
exhibited in Jacobson's Patres Apostolici, vol. i. p. 110, 1838 (1863); and one
in Cassell's Bible Dict. vol. i. p. 49.</note>,
the first, Gen. i. 1, 2, being written in vermilion, the second,
Acts xx. 28, in the once black, but now yellowish-brown ink of
the body of the Codex. The punctuation, which no later hand
has meddled with, consists merely of a point placed at the end
of a sentence, usually on a level with the top of the preceding
letter, but not always; and a vacant space follows the point at
the end of a paragraph, the space being proportioned to the
break in the sense. Capital letters of various sizes abound at
the beginning of books and sections, not painted as in later
copies, but written by the original scribe in common ink. As
these capitals stand entirely outside the column in the margin
(excepting in such rare cases as Gen. i. 1), if the section begins
in the middle of a line, the capital is necessarily postponed till
the beginning of the next line, whose first letter is always the
capital, even though it be in the middle of a word (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>).
Vermilion is freely used in the initial lines of books, and has
stood the test of time much better than the black ink: the first
four lines of each column on the first page of Genesis are in this
colour, accompanied with the only breathings and accents in
the manuscript (<hi rend='italic'>see above</hi>, pp. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>). The first line of St. Mark,
the first three of St. Luke, the first verse of St. John, the opening
of the Acts down to δι, and so on for other books, are in vermilion.
At the end of each book are neat and unique ornaments
in the ink of the first hand: see especially those at the
end of St. Mark and the Acts. As we have before stated this
codex is the earliest which has the κεφάλαια proper, the so-called
Ammonian sections, and the Eusebian canons complete.
Lists of the κεφάλαια precede each Gospel, except the first, where
they are lost. Their titles stand or have stood at the top of the
pages, but the binder has often ruthlessly cut them short, and
committed other yet more serious mutilation at the edges. The
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
places at which they begin are indicated throughout, and their
numbers are moreover set in the margin of Luke and John.
The sections and Eusebian canons are conspicuous in the margin,
and at the beginning of each of these sections a capital letter is
found. The rest of the New Testament has no division into
κεφάλαια, as was usual in later times, but paragraphs and capitals
occur as the sense requires.
</p>

<p>
The palaeographic reasons for assigning this manuscript to
the beginning or middle of the fifth century (the date now very
generally acquiesced in, though it may be referred even to the
end of the fourth century, and is certainly not much later)
depend in part on the general style of the writing, which is at
once firm, elegant and simple; partly on the formation of certain
letters, in which respect it holds a middle place between copies
of the fourth and sixth centuries. The reader will recall what
we have already said (pp. <ref target='Pg033'>33-40</ref>) as to the shape of <hi rend='italic'>alpha</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>delta</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>epsilon</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pi</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>sigma</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>phi</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>omega</hi> in the Codex Alexandrinus.
Woide, who edited the New Testament, believes that two hands
were employed in that volume, changing in the page containing
1 Cor. v-vii, the vellum of the latter portion being thinner and
the ink more thick, so that it has peeled off or eaten through
the vellum in many places. This, however, is a point on which
those who know manuscripts best will most hesitate to speak
decidedly<note place='foot'>Notice especially what Tregelles says of the Codex Augiensis (Tregelles'
Horne's Introd. vol. iv. p. 198), where the difference of hand in the leaves
removed from their proper place is much more striking than any change in
Cod. Alexandrinus. Yet even in that case it is likely that one scribe only was
engaged. It should be stated, however, that Mr. E. Maunde Thompson, who,
edits the autotype edition, believes that the hand changed at the beginning
of St. Luke, and altered again at 1 Cor. x. 8. His reasons appear to us precarious
and insufficient, and he seems to cut away the ground from under him
when he admits (Praef. p. 9) that <q>sufficient uniformity is maintained to make
it difficult to decide the exact place where a new hand begins.</q></note>.
</p>

<p>
The external arguments for fixing the date are less weighty,
but all point to the same conclusion. On the evidence for its
being written by St. Thecla, indeed, no one has cared to lay
much stress, though some have thought that the scribe might
belong to a monastery dedicated to that holy martyr<note place='foot'>Tischendorf, Septuagint, Proleg. p. lxv, cites with some approval Grabe's
references (Proleg. Cap. i. pp. 9-12) to Gregory Nazianzen [d. 389], three of
whose Epistles are written to a holy virgin of that name (of course not the
martyr), to whose παρθενών at Seleucia he betook himself, the better to carry
out his very sincere <foreign rend='italic'>nolo episcopari</foreign> on the death of his father Gregory, Bishop of
Nazianzus: Πρῶτον μὲν ἦλθον εἰς Σελεύκειαν φυγὰς | Τὸν παρθενῶνα τῆς ἀοιδίμου
κόρης | Θέκλας κ.τ.λ. <q>De vitâ suâ.</q></note>, whether
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
the contemporary of St. Paul be meant, or her namesake who
suffered in the second year of Diocletian, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 286 (Eusebius de
Martyr. Palaestin. c. iii). Tregelles explains the origin of the
Arabic inscription, on which Cyril's statement appears to rest, by
remarking that the New Testament in our manuscript at present
commences with Matt. xxv. 6, this lesson (Matt. xxv. 1-13) <hi rend='italic'>being
that appointed by the Greek Church for the festival of St. Thecla</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>see above</hi>, Menology, p. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, Sept. 24). Thus the Egyptian who
wrote this Arabic note, observing the name of Thecla in the
now mutilated upper margin of the Codex, where such rubrical
notes are commonly placed by later hands, may have hastily
concluded that she wrote the book, and so perplexed our Biblical
critics. It seems a fatal objection to this shrewd conjecture, as
Mr. E. Maunde Thompson points out, that the Arabic numeration
of the leaf, set in the <foreign rend='italic'>verso</foreign> of the lower margin, itself posterior
in date to the Arabic note relating to Thecla, is 26<note place='foot'>The last Arabic numeral in the Old Testament is 641, the first in the New
Testament 667.</note>; so that the
twenty-five leaves now lost must have been still extant when
that note was written.
</p>

<p>
Other more trustworthy reasons for assigning Cod. A to the
fifth century may be summed up very briefly. The presence of
the canons of Eusebius [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 268-340?], and of the epistle to
Marcellinus by the great Athanasius, Patriarch of Alexandria
[300?-373], standing before the Psalms, place a limit in one
direction, while the absence of the Euthalian divisions of the
Acts and Epistles (<hi rend='italic'>see above</hi>, p. <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>), which came into vogue very
soon after <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 458, and the shortness of the ὑπογραφαί (<hi rend='italic'>above</hi>,
p. <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>), appear tolerably decisive against a later date than <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 450.
The insertion of the Epistles of Clement, like that of the treatises
of Barnabas and Hermas in the Cod. Sinaiticus (p. <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>), recalls
us to a period when the canon of Scripture was in some particulars
a little unsettled, that is, about the age of the Councils of
Laodicea (363?) and of Carthage (397). Other arguments have
been urged both for an earlier and a later date, but they scarcely
deserve discussion. Wetstein's objection to the name Θεοτόκος as
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
applied to the Blessed Virgin in the title to her song, added to
the Psalms, is quite groundless: that appellation was given to
her by both the Gregories in the middle of the fourth century
(<hi rend='italic'>vid.</hi> Suicer, Thesaur. Eccles. i. p. 1387), as habitually as it was
a century after: nor should we insist much on the contrary
upon Woide's or Schulz's persuasion that the τρισάγιον (ἅγιος
ὁ θεός, ἅγιος ἰσχυρός, ἅγιος ἀθάνατος) would have been found in
the ὕμνος ἑωθινός after the Psalms, had the manuscript been
written as late as the fifth century.
</p>

<p>
Partial and inaccurate collations of the New Testament portion
of this manuscript were made by Patrick Young, Librarian to
Charles I<note place='foot'>Very interesting is Whitelock's notice of a design which was never carried
out, under the date of March 13, 1645. <q>The Assembly of Divines desired
by some of their brethren, sent to the House [of Commons] that Mr. Patrick
Young might be encouraged in the printing of the Greek Testament much
expected and desired by the learned, especially beyond seas; and an ordinance
was read for printing and publishing the Old Testament of the Septuagint
translation, wherein Mr. Young had formerly taken pains and had in his hand,
as library keeper at St. James's, an original <hi rend='italic'>Teeta</hi> [sic] Bible of that translation</q>
(Memorials, p. 197, ed. 1732).</note>, who first published from it the Epistles of Clement
in 1633: then by Alexander Huish, Prebendary of Wells, for
Walton's Polyglott, and by some others<note place='foot'><q>MS<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>m</hi> Alexand<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>m</hi> accuratissime ipse contuli, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1716. Rich: Bentleius.</q>
Trin. Coll. Camb. B. xvii. 9, in a copy of Fell's Greek Testament, 1675, which
contains his collation. Ellis, Bentleii Critica Sacra, p. xxviii.</note>. The Old Testament
portion was edited in 1707-20, after a not very happy plan,
but with learned Prolegomena and notes, by the Prussian
J. E. Grabe, the second and third of his four volumes being
posthumous.
</p>

<p>
In 1786, Charles Godfrey Woide, preacher at the Dutch
Chapel Royal and Assistant Librarian in the British Museum,
a distinguished Coptic scholar [d. 1790], published, by the aid
of 456 subscribers, a noble folio edition of the New Testament
from this manuscript, with valuable Prolegomena, a copy of the
text which, so far as it has been tested, has been found reasonably
accurate, together with notes on the changes made in the codex
by later hands, and a minute collation of its readings with the
common text as presented in Kuster's edition of Mill's N. T.
(1710). In this last point Woide has not been taken as a model
by subsequent editors of manuscripts, much to the inconvenience
of the student. In 1816-28 the Old Testament portion of the
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
Codex Alexandrinus was published in three folio volumes at the
national expense, by the Rev. Henry Hervey Baber, also of the
British Museum, the Prolegomena to whose magnificent work
are very inferior to Woide's, but contain some additional information.
Both these performances, and many others like them
which we shall have to describe, are printed in an uncial type,
bearing some general resemblance to that of their respective
originals, but which must not be supposed to convey any
adequate notion of their actual appearance. Such quasi-facsimiles
(for they are nothing more), while they add to the
cost of the book, seem to answer no useful purpose whatever;
and, if taken by an incautious reader for more than they profess
to be, will seriously mislead him. In 1860 Mr. B. H. Cowper
put forth an octavo edition of the New Testament pages in
common type, but burdened with modern breathings and
accents, the lacunae of the manuscript being unwisely supplied
by means of Kuster's edition of Mill, and the original paragraphs
departed from, wheresoever they were judged to be inconvenient.
These obvious faults are the more to be regretted, inasmuch as
Mr. Cowper has not shrunk from the labour of revising Woide's
edition by a comparison with the Codex itself, thus giving to his
book a distinctive value of its own. An admirable autotype
facsimile of the New Testament was published in 1879, and
afterwards of the Old Testament, by Mr. E. Maunde Thompson,
then the Principal Keeper of Manuscripts, now the Principal
Librarian, of the British Museum.
</p>

<p>
The Codex Alexandrinus has been judged to be carelessly
written; many errors of transcription no doubt exist, but not
so many as in some copies (e.g. Cod. א), nor more than in others
(as Cod. B). None other than the ordinary abridgements
are found in it (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> pp. <ref target='Pg049'>49-50</ref>): numerals are not expressed by
letters except in Apoc. vii. 4; xxi. 17: ι and υ have usually
the dots over them at the beginning of a syllable. Of itacisms
it may be doubted whether it contains more than others of
the same date: the interchange of ι and ει, η and ι, ε, αι, are the
most frequent; but these mutations are too common to prove
anything touching the country of the manuscript. Its external
history renders it very likely that it was written at Alexandria,
that great manufactory of correct and elegant copies, while
Egypt was yet a Christian land: but such forms as λήμψομαι,
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
ἐλάβαμεν, ἦλθαν, ἔνατος, ἐκαθερίσθη, and others named by Woide,
are peculiar to no single nation, but are found repeatedly in
Greek-Latin codices which unquestionably originated in Western
Europe. This manuscript is of the very greatest importance to
the critic, inasmuch as it exhibits (especially in the Gospels) a text
more nearly approaching that found in later copies than is read
in others of its high antiquity, although some of its errors are
portentous enough, e.g. θ<hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>υ</hi> for <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ιυ</hi> in John xix. 40. This topic,
however, will be discussed at length in another place, and we
shall elsewhere consider the testimony Codex A bears in the
celebrated passage 1 Tim. iii. 16.
</p>

<p>
B. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Vaticanus</hi> 1209 is probably the oldest large vellum
manuscript in existence, and is the glory of the great Vatican
Library at Rome. To this legitimate source of deep interest
must be added the almost romantic curiosity which was once
excited by the jealous watchfulness of its official guardians.
But now that an acquaintance with it has been placed within
the reach of scholars through the magnificent autotype edition
issued by the authorities of the Vatican, it may be hoped that
all such mystic glamour will soon be left with the past.
This book seems to have been brought into the Vatican
Library shortly after its establishment by Pope Nicolas V in
1448, but nothing is known of its previous history<note place='foot'>See Bibliothèque du Vatican au X<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>me</hi> siècle, par Eugène Müntz et Paul
Fabre, Paris. Thorn. 824 Lat., 400 Gr.</note>. It is
entered in the earliest catalogue of that Library, made in
1475. Since the missing portions at the end of the New
Testament are believed to have been supplied in the fifteenth
century from a manuscript belonging to Cardinal Bessarion, we
may be allowed to conjecture, if we please, that this learned
Greek brought the Codex into the west of Europe. It was
taken to Paris by Napoleon I, where it was studied by Hug in
1809. Although this book has not even yet been as thoroughly
collated, or rendered as available as it might be to the critical
student, its general character and appearance are sufficiently well
known. It is a quarto volume, arranged in quires of five sheets
or ten leaves each, like Codex Marchalianus of the Prophets
written in the sixth or seventh century and Cod. Rossanensis of
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
the Gospels to be described hereafter, not of four or three
sheets as Cod. א, the ancient, perhaps the original, numbering
of the quires being often found in the margin. The New
Testament fills 142 out of its 759 thin and delicate vellum
leaves, said to be made of the skins of antelopes: it is
bound in red morocco, being 10-½ inches high, 10 broad,
4-½ thick. It once contained the whole Bible in Greek, the
Old Testament of the Septuagint version (a tolerably fair representation
of which was exhibited in the Roman edition as early
as 1587<note place='foot'>The <q>Epistle</q> of Cardinal Carafa to Sixtus V, and the Preface to the Reader
by the actual editor Peter Morinus, both of which Tischendorf reprints in full
(Septuagint, Proleg. pp. xxi-xxvii), display an amount of critical skill and
discernment quite beyond their age, and in strange contrast with the signal
mismanagement in regard to the revision of the Latin Vulgate version under
the auspices of the same Pope.</note>), except the books of the Maccabees and the Prayer of
Manasses. The first forty-six chapters of Genesis (the manuscript
begins at πολιν, Gen. xlvi. 28) and Psalms cv-cxxxvii, also the
books of the Maccabees, are wanting. The New Testament is
complete down to Heb. ix. 14 καθα: the rest of the Epistle
to the Hebrews (the Catholic Epistles had followed the Acts,
<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>), and the Apocalypse, being written in the later hand
alluded to above. The peculiar arrangement of three columns on
a page, or six on the opened leaf of the volume, is described by
eye-witnesses as very striking: in the poetical books of the
Old Testament (since they are written στιχηρῶς) only two
columns fill a page. Our facsimile (Plate <ref target='Plate_VIII'>viii</ref>, No. 20) comprises
Mark xvi. 3 μιν τον λιθον to the end of verse 8, where
the Gospel ends abruptly; both the arabesque ornament and
the subscription ΚΑΤΑ ΜΑΡΚΟΝ being in a later hand (for M
<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>). All who have inspected the Codex are loud in
their praises of the fine thin vellum, the clear and elegant
hand of the first penman, the simplicity of the whole style of
the work: capital letters, so frequent in the Codex Alexandrinus,
were totally wanting in this document for some centuries.
In several of these particulars our manuscript resembles the
Herculanean rolls, and thus asserts a just claim to high antiquity,
which the absence of the divisions into κεφάλαια, of the sections
and canons, and the substitution in their room of another scheme
of chapters of its own (described above, p. <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>), beyond question
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
tend very powerfully to confirm. Each column contains
ordinarily forty-two lines<note place='foot'>In Pentateuch, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, and 1 Kings i. 1-xix. 11, there are
forty-four lines in a column; and in 2 Paralip. x. 16-xxvi. 13, there are
forty lines in a column.</note>, each line from sixteen to eighteen
letters, of a size somewhat less than in Cod. A, much less than
in Cod. א (though they all vary a little in this respect), with no
intervals between words, a space of the breadth of half a letter
being left at the end of a sentence, and a little more at the
conclusion of a paragraph; the first letter of the new sentence
occasionally standing a little out of the line (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> pp. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>). It
has been doubted whether any of the stops are <foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign>,
and (contrary to the judgement of Birch and others) the breathings
and accents are now universally allowed to have been added
by a later hand. This hand, referred by some to the eighth
century (although Tischendorf, with Dr. Hort's approval, assigns
it to the tenth or eleventh<note place='foot'>The writer of the Preface to the sixth volume of the Roman edition of 1881
(apparently Fabiani), is jubilant over his discovery of the name of this retracer
(<q>eruditissimi et patientissimi viri,</q> as he is pleased to call him, p. xviii) in
the person of Clement the Monk, who has written his name twice in the book
in a scrawl of the fifteenth century. But mere resemblance in the ink is but
a lame proof of identity, and Fabiani recognizes some other correctors, whom
he designates as B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>, posterior to the mischievous <q>instaurator.</q></note>), retraced, with as much care as such
an operation would permit, the faint lines of the original writing
(the ink whereof was perhaps never quite black), the remains of
which can even now be seen by a keen-sighted reader by the
side of the thicker and more modern strokes; and, anxious at
the same time to represent a critical revision of the text, the
writer left untouched such words or letters as he wished to
reject. In these last places, <emph>where no breathings or accents and
scarcely any stops<note place='foot'>Hug says <emph>none</emph>, but Tischendorf (Cod. Frid.-Aug. Proleg. p. 9) himself
detected two in a part that the second scribe had left untouched; and not a very
few elsewhere (N. T. Vatican. Proleg. pp. xx, xxi, 1867); though a break often
occurs with no stop by either hand. In the much contested passage Rom. ix. 5,
Dr. Vance Smith (<q>Revised Texts and Margins,</q> p. 84, note), while confidently
claiming the stop after σαρκα in Cod. A as <foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign>, and noticing the space
after the word in Cod. Ephraemi (C), admits that <q>in the Vatican the originality
of the stops may be doubtful.</q> In the judgement of Fabiani, <q>vix aliqua primo
exscriptori tribuenda</q> (Praef. N. T. Vat. 1881, p. xviii).</note> have ever been detected</emph>, we have an opportunity
of seeing the manuscript in its primitive condition,
before it had been tampered with by the later scribe. There
are occasional breaks in the continuity of the writing, every
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
descent in the genealogies of our Lord (Matt. i, Luke iii<note place='foot'>The publication of the Roman edition (1868-81) enables us to add (Abbot,
<foreign rend='italic'>ubi supra</foreign>, p. 193) that the blessings of the twelve patriarchs in Gen. xlix are in
separate paragraphs numbered from A to IB, that the twenty-two names of the
unclean birds Deut. xiv. 12-18, twenty-five kings in Josh. xii. 10-22, eleven
dukes in 1 Chr. i. 51-54, each stand in a separate line. In Cod. א, especially
in the New Testament, this arrangement στιχηρῶς is much more frequent
than in Cod. B, although the practice is in some measure common to both.</note>), each
of the beatitudes (Matt. v), of the parables in Matt. xiii, and
the salutations of Rom. xvi, forming a separate paragraph; but
such a case will oftentimes not occur for several consecutive
pages. The writer's plan was to proceed regularly with a book
until it was finished: then to break off from the column he was
writing, and to begin the next book on the very next column.
Thus only <emph>one</emph> column perfectly blank is found in the whole
New Testament<note place='foot'>The Roman edition (1868-81) also makes known to us that in the Old
Testament two columns are left blank between Nehemiah and the Psalms,
which could not have been otherwise, inasmuch as the Psalms are written
στιχηρῶς with but two columns on a page. Between Tobit and Hosea (which
book stands first of the Prophetical writings) a column is very naturally left
blank, and two columns at the end of Daniel, with whose prophecy the Old
Testament concludes. But these peculiarities obviously bear no analogy to the
case of the end of St. Mark's Gospel.</note>, that which follows ἐφοβοῦντο γάρ in Mark
xvi. 8: and since Cod. B is the only one yet known, except
Cod. א, that actually omits the last twelve verses of that
Gospel, by leaving such a space the scribe has intimated that
he was fully aware of their existence, or even found them in
the copy from which he wrote. The capital letters at the
beginning of each book are likewise due to the corrector,
who sometimes erased, sometimes merely touched slightly,
the original initial letter, which (as in the Herculanean rolls)
is no larger than any other. The <emph>paragraph</emph> marks (usually
straight lines, but sometimes [symbol]<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg049'>49-51</ref>.</note>) are seen quite frequently in
some parts; whether from the first hand is very doubtful. The
note of citation &gt; is perpetual, not occasional as in Cod. א.
Fewer abridgements than usual occur in this venerable copy.
The formation of <hi rend='italic'>delta</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pi</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>chi</hi>; the loop-like curve on the left
side of <hi rend='italic'>alpha</hi>; the absence of points at the extremities of
<hi rend='italic'>sigma</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>epsilon</hi>; the length and size of <hi rend='italic'>rho</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>upsilon</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>phi</hi>, all
point to the <hi rend='smallcaps'>fourth</hi> century as the date of this manuscript.
The smaller letters so often found at the end of lines preserve
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
the same firm and simple character as the rest; of the use of
the apostrophus, so frequent in Codd. א, A and some others,
Tischendorf enumerates ten instances in the New Testament
(N. T. Vatican. Proleg. p. xxi), whereof four are represented in
the Roman edition of 1868, with two more which Tischendorf
considers as simple points (Acts vii. 13, 14).
</p>

<p>
Tischendorf says truly enough that something like a history
might be written of the futile attempts to collate Cod. B, and
a very unprofitable history it would be. The manuscript is first
distinctly heard of (for it does not appear to have been used for
the Complutensian Polyglott<note place='foot'>The writer of the Preface to the Roman edition (vol. vi. Praef. p. 9, 1881)
vainly struggles to maintain the opposite view, because the Cardinal, in his
Preface to the Complutensian N. T., speaks about <q>adhibitis Vaticanis libris,</q>
as if there was but one there.</note>) through Sepulveda, to whose
correspondence with Erasmus attention has been seasonably
recalled by Tregelles. Writing in 1533, he says, <q>Est enim
Graecum exemplar antiquissimum in Bibliothecâ Vaticanâ, in quo
diligentissimè et accuratissimè literis majusculis conscriptum
utrumque Testamentum continetur longè diversum a vulgatis
exemplaribus</q>: and, after noticing as a weighty proof of
excellence its agreement with the Latin version (multum
convenit cum vetere nostrâ translatione) against the common
Greek text (vulgatam Graecorum editionem), he furnishes
Erasmus with 365 readings as a convincing argument in support
of his statements. It would probably be from this list
that in his Annotations to the Acts, published in 1535, Erasmus
cites the reading καῦδα, ch. xxvii. 16 (<q>quidam admonent</q> is
the expression he uses), from a Greek codex in the Pontifical
Library, since for this reading Cod. B is the only known <emph>Greek</emph>
witness, except a corrector of Cod. א. It seems, however, that
he had obtained some account of this manuscript from the Papal
Librarian Paul Bombasius as early as 1521 (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Wetstein's
Proleg. N. T., vol. i. p. 23). Lucas Brugensis, who published
his Notationes in S. Biblia in 1580, and his Commentary on
the Four Gospels (dedicated to Cardinal Bellarmine) in 1606,
made known some twenty extracts from Cod. B taken by
Werner of Nimeguen; that most imperfect collection being the
only source from which Mill and even Wetstein had any
acquaintance with the contents of this first-rate document.
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
More indeed might have been gleaned from the Barberini
readings gathered in or about 1625 (of which we shall speak
in the next section), but their real value and character were not
known in the lifetime of Wetstein. In 1698 Lorenzo Alexander
Zacagni, Librarian of the Vatican, in his Preface to the Collectanea
Monumentorum Veterum Eccles., describes Cod. B, and
especially its peculiar division into sections, in a passage cited
by Mill (Proleg. § 1480). In 1669 indeed the first real collation
of the manuscript with the Aldine edition (1518) had been
attempted by Bartolocci, then Librarian of the Vatican; from
some accident, however, it was never published, though a transcript
under the feigned name of Giulio a Sta. Anastasia
yet remains in the Imperial Library of Paris (MSS. Gr.
Supplem. 53), where it was first discovered and used by Scholz
in 1819, and subsequently by Tischendorf and Muralt, the latter
of whom (apparently on but slender grounds) regards it as the
best hitherto made; others have declared it to be very imperfect,
and quite inferior to those of Bentley and Birch. The
collation which bears Bentley's name (Trin. Coll. B. xvii. 3,
in Cephalaeus' N. T. 1524) was procured about 1720 by his
money and the labour of the Abbate Mico, for the purpose of
his projected Greek Testament. When he had found out its
defects, by means of an examination of the original by his
nephew Thomas Bentley in 1726, our great critic engaged the
Abbate Rulotta in 1729 for forty scudi (Bentley's Correspondence,
p. 706) to revise Mico's sheets, and especially to note the
changes made by the second hand. Rulotta's papers came to
light in 1855 among the Bentley manuscripts in the Library of
Trinity College, Cambridge (B. xvii. 20), and have lately proved
of signal value<note place='foot'>Rulotta's labours are now printed in Bentleii Critica Sacra by Mr. A. A.
Ellis, 1862, pp. 121-154.</note>; Mico's were published in 1799 at Oxford, by
Henry Ford, Lord Almoner's Reader in Arabic there (1783-1813),
together with some Thebaic fragments of the New
Testament, in a volume which (since it was chiefly drawn from
Woide's posthumous papers) he was pleased to call an Appendix
to the Codex Alexandrinus. A fourth collation of the Vatican
MS. was made about 1780 by Andrew Birch of Copenhagen,
and is included in the notes to the first volume of his Greek
Testament 1788, or published separately in three volumes which
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
were issued successively 1798 (Acts, Cath. Epp., Paul.), 1800
(Apoc.), and 1801 (Evans). Birch's collation does not extend
to the Gospels of St. Luke and St. John, and on the whole is less
full and exact than Mico's. In 1810, however, when, with the
other best treasures of the Vatican, Codex B was at Paris, the
celebrated critic J. L. Hug sent forth his treatise <q>de Antiquitate
Vaticani Codicis Commentatio,</q> and though even he did not
perceive the need of a new and full collation when he examined
it in 1809, he has the merit of first placing it in the paramount
rank it still holds as one of the oldest and most venerable of
extant monuments of sacred antiquity. His conclusion respecting
its date, that it is not later than the middle of the fourth century,
has been acquiesced in with little opposition, though Tischendorf
declares rather pithily that he holds this belief <q>non propter
Hugium sed cum Hugio</q> (Cod. Ephraem. Proleg. p. 19). Some
of his reasons, no doubt, are weak enough<note place='foot'>Thus the correspondence of Codex B with what St. Basil (c. Eunom. ii. 19)
states he found in the middle of the fourth century, ἐν τοῖς παλαιοῖς τῶν ἀντιγράφων,
in Eph. i. 1, viz. τοῖς οὖσιν without ἐν Ἐφέσῳ, though now read only in
this and the Sinaitic manuscript <foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign>, and in one cursive copy (Cod. 67)
<foreign rend='italic'>secundâ manu</foreign>, seems in itself of but little weight. Another point that has been
raised is the position of the Epistle to the Hebrews. But this argument can
apply only to the elder document from which the Vatican MS. was taken, and
wherein this book unquestionably followed that to the Galatians. In Cod. B it
<emph>always</emph> stood in its present place, after 2 Thess., as in the Codices cited p. 74, note.</note>; but the strength of
his position depends on an accumulation of minute particulars,
against which there seems nothing to set up which would suggest
a lower period. On its return to Rome, this volume was no
longer available for the free use and reference of critics. In
1843 Tischendorf, after long and anxious expectation during
a visit to Rome that lasted some months, obtained a sight of it
for two days of three hours each<note place='foot'>Besides the twenty-five readings Tischendorf observed himself, Cardinal Mai
supplied him with thirty-four more for his N. T. of 1849. His seventh edition
of 1859 was enriched by 230 other readings furnished by Albert Dressel in 1855.</note>. In 1844 Edward de Muralt
was admitted to the higher privilege of three days or nine hours
enjoyment of this treasure, and on the strength of the favour
published an edition of the New Testament, <hi rend='italic'>ad fidem codicis
principis Vaticani</hi>, in 1846. Tregelles, who went to Rome in
1845 for the special purpose of consulting it, was treated even
worse. He had forearmed himself (as he fondly imagined) with
recommendatory letters from Cardinal Wiseman, and was often
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
allowed to <emph>see</emph> the manuscript, but hindered from transcribing
any of its readings<note place='foot'><q>They would not let me open it,</q> he adds, <q>without searching my pocket,
and depriving me of pen, ink, and paper.... If I looked at a passage too long the
two <foreign rend='italic'>prelati</foreign> would snatch the book out from my hand.</q> Tregelles, Lecture on the
Historic Evidence of the N. T., p. 84.</note>.
</p>

<p>
What the Papal authorities would not entrust to others,
they had at least the merit of attempting and at length accomplishing
themselves. As early as 1836 Bishop Wiseman
announced in his Lectures on the Connection between Science
and Revelation, vol. ii. pp. 187-191, that Cardinal Mai, whose
services to classical and ecclesiastical literature were renowned
throughout Europe, was engaged on an edition of the Codex
Vaticanus, commenced under the immediate sanction of Pope
Leo XII (1823-29). As years passed by and no such work
appeared, adverse reports and evil surmises began to take the
place of hope, although the Cardinal often spoke of his work as
already finished, only that he desired to write full Prolegomena
before it should appear. In September 1854 he died, honoured
and ripe in years; and at length, when no more seemed to be
looked for in that quarter, five quarto volumes issued from the
Roman press in 1857, the New Testament comprising the fifth
volume, with a slight and meagre preface by the Cardinal, and
a letter to the reader by <q>Carolus Vercellone, Sodalis Barnabites,</q>
which told in a few frank manly words how little accuracy we
had to expect in a work, by the publication of which he still
persuaded himself he was decorating Mai's memory <q>novâ usque
gloriâ atque splendidiore coronâ</q> (tom. i. p. iii). The cause of
that long delay now required no explanation. In fact so long
as Mai lived the edition never would have appeared; for though
he had not patience or special skill enough to accomplish his
task well, he was too good a scholar not to know that he had
done it very ill. The text is broken up into paragraphs, the
numbers of the modern chapters and verses being placed in the
margin; the peculiar divisions of the Codex Vaticanus (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>)
sometimes omitted, sometimes tampered with. The Greek type
employed is not an imitation of the uncials in the manuscript
(of which circumstance we do not complain), but has modern
stops, breathings, accents, ι <hi rend='italic'>subscript</hi>, &amp;c., as if the venerable
document were written yesterday. As regards the orthography
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
it is partially, and only partially, modernized; clauses or whole
passages omitted in the manuscript are supplied from other
sources, although the fact is duly notified<note place='foot'>The great gap in the Pauline Epistles is filled up from Vatic. 1761 (Act. 158,
Paul. 192) of the eleventh century.</note>; sometimes the
readings of the first hand are put in the margin, while those of
the second stand in the text, sometimes the contrary: in a word,
the plan of the work exhibits all the faults such a performance
well can have. Nor is the execution at all less objectionable.
Although the five volumes were ten years in printing (1828-38),
Mai devoted to their superintendence only his scanty spare
hours, and even then worked so carelessly that after cancelling
a hundred pages for their incurable want of exactness, he was
reduced to the shift of making <emph>manual</emph> corrections with moveable
types, and projected huge tables of errata, which Vercellone has
in some measure tried to supply. When once it is stated that
the type was set up from the common Elzevir or from some
other printed Greek Testament, the readings of the Codex itself
being inserted as corrections, and the whole revised by means of
an assistant who read the proof-sheets to the Cardinal while he
inspected the manuscript; no one will look for accuracy from
a method which could not possibly lead to it. Accordingly,
when Mai's text came to be compared with the collations of
Bartolocci, of Mico, of Rulotta, and of Birch, or with the
scattered readings which had been extracted by others, it was
soon discovered that while this edition added very considerably
to our knowledge of the Codex Vaticanus, and often enabled us
to form a decision on its readings when the others were at
variance; it was in its turn convicted by them of so many
errors, oversights, and inconsistencies, that its single evidence
could never be used with confidence, especially when it agreed
with the commonly received Greek text. Immediately after the
appearance of Mai's expensive quartos, an octavo reprint of the
New Testament was struck off at Leipsic for certain London
booksellers, which proved but a hasty, slovenly, unscholarlike
performance, and was put aside in 1859 by a cheap Roman
edition in octavo, prepared, as was the quarto, by Mai, prefaced
by another graceful and sensible epistle of Vercellone<note place='foot'>Other editions of the Vatican N. T. appeared at Ratisbon; at Leyden (1860)
by A. Kuenen and C. G. Cobet, with a masterly Preface by the latter; and at
Berlin (1862) by Philip Buttmann, furnished with an Appendix containing the
varying results of no less than nine collations, eight of which we have described
in the text, the ninth being derived from Lachmann's Greek Testament (1742,
1850), whose readings were all obtained second-hand. Tischendorf does not
much commend the accuracy of Buttmann's work.</note>. This
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
last edition was undertaken by the Cardinal, after sad experience
had taught him the defects of his larger work, and he took good
care to avoid some of the worst of them: the readings of the
second hand are usually, though not always, banished to the
margin, their number on the whole is increased, gross errors are
corrected, omissions supplied, and the Vatican chapters are
given faithfully and in full. But Mai's whole procedure in this
matter is so truly unfortunate, that in a person whose fame
was less solidly grounded, we should impute it to mere helpless
incapacity<note place='foot'><q>Angelus Mai, quamquam, ut in proverbio est, ἐν τυφλῶν πόλει γλαμυρὸς
βασιλεύων, non is erat cui tanta res rectè mandari posset:</q> Kuenen and Cobet,
N. T. Vat. Praef. p. 1. Tischendorf too, in his over querulous Responsa ad
Calumnias Romanas &amp;c., 1870, p. 11, is not more than just in alleging <q>Angelum
Maium in editionibus suis Codicis Vaticani alienissimum se praebuisse ab
omni subtiliore rei palaeographicae scientiâ, ac tantum non ignarum earum legum
ad quas is codex in usum criticum edendus esset.</q> The defence set up for Mai
in the Preface to the Roman volume of 1881, was that he intended to produce only
a new edition of the <q>authentic</q> Septuagint of 1586-7, chiefly for the use of
Greek-speaking Catholics.</note>. Not only did he split up the paragraphs of his
quarto into the modern chapters and verses (in itself a most
undesirable change, <hi rend='italic'>see above</hi>, p. <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>), but by omitting some
things and altering others, he introduced almost as many errors
as he removed. When Dean Burgon was permitted to examine
the Codex for an hour and a half in 1860, on consulting it for
sixteen passages out of hundreds wherein the two are utterly at
variance, he discovered that the quarto was right in seven of
them, the octavo in nine: as if Mai were determined that
neither of his editions should supersede the use of the other.
Dean Alford also collated numerous passages in 1861<note place='foot'>The Dean himself on Feb. 20, 1861, and for four subsequent days, <q>went
twice over the doubtful passages and facsimilized most of the important various
readings,</q> in spite of much opposition from the Librarian, who <q>insisted that
our order from Antonelli, although it ran <q>per verificare,</q> to verify passages,
only extended to seeing the Codex, not to using it.</q> (Life by his Widow,
pp. 310, 315.)</note>, and his
secretary Mr. Cure in 1862, especially with reference to the
several correcting hands: <q>in errorem quidem et ipse haud raro
inductus,</q> is Tischendorf's verdict on his labours. Thus critics
of every shade of opinion became unanimous on one point, that
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
a new edition of the Codex Vaticanus was as imperatively
needed as ever; one which should preserve with accuracy all
that the first hand has written (transcriptural errors included),
should note in every instance the corrections made by the
second hand, and, wherever any one of the previous collators
might be found in error, should expressly state the true reading.
</p>

<p>
It would have been a grievous reproach had no efforts been
made to supply so great and acknowledged a want. Early in
1866, Tischendorf again visited Rome, and when admitted into
the presence of Pope Pius IX, boldly sought permission to edit
at his own cost such an edition of Cod. B as he had already
published of Cod. א. The request was denied by his Holiness,
who obscurely hinted his intention of carrying out the same
design on his own account. Tischendorf, however, obtained
permission to use the manuscript so far as to consult it in
such parts of the New Testament as presented any special
difficulty, or respecting which previous collators were at
variance. He commenced his task February 28, and in the
course of it could not refrain from copying at length twenty
pages of the great Codex&mdash;nineteen from the New Testament,
and one from the Old. This licence was not unnaturally
regarded as a breach of his contract, so that, after he had used
the manuscript for eight days, it was abruptly withdrawn from
him on March 12. An appeal to the generosity of Vercellone,
who had been entrusted with the care of the forthcoming edition,
procured for him the sight of this coveted treasure for six days
longer between March 20 and 26, the Italian being always
present on these latter occasions, and receiving instruction for
the preparation of his own work by watching the processes
of a master hand. Thus fourteen days of three hours each,
used zealously and skilfully, enabled Tischendorf to put forth
an edition of Cod. B far superior to any that preceded it<note place='foot'><q>Novum Testamentum Vaticanum post Angeli Maii aliorumque imperfectos
labores ex ipso codice edidit Ae. F. C. Tischendorf.</q> Lipsiae, 4to, 1867.</note>. The
Prolegomena are full of matter from which we have drawn
freely in the foregoing description, the text is in cursive type,
the nineteen pages which cost him so dearly being arranged in
their proper lines, the remainder according to columns. Much
that ought to have been noted was doubtless passed over by
Tischendorf for mere pressure of time; but he takes great
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
pains to distinguish the readings of the original writer or his
διορθωτής (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>)<note place='foot'>To his hand Tischendorf assigns seven readings, Matt. xiii. 52; xiv. 5; xvi. 4;
xxii. 10; xxvii. 4. Luke iii. 1 (<hi rend='italic'>bis</hi>), 7. <q>For some six centuries after it was written
B appears to have undergone no changes in its text except from the hand of the
<q>corrector,</q> the <q>second hand</q></q> (Hort, Introd. p. 270). What then of B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>?</note>, both of whom supplied words or letters
here and there in the margin or between the lines<note place='foot'>It must surely be to these, the earliest scribes, that Cobet refers when he
uses language that would not be at all applicable to the case of B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> or B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>: <q>In
Vaticano duorum librorum veterum testimonia continentur, et nihilo plus in
primâ manu quam in secundâ inest auctoritatis ac fidei. Utriusque unaquaeque
lectio ex se ipsâ spectanda ponderandaque est, et si hoc ages, modo hanc modo
illam animadvertes esse potiorem. Hoc autem in primis firmiter tenendum
est, non esse secundae manûs lectiones correctoris alicujus suspiciones aut
conjecturas, sive illae sunt acutiores sive leviores, sed quidquid a secundâ manu
correctum, mutatum, deletum esse Maius referat, id omne haud secus atque
id quod prior manus dederit, perantiqui cujusdam Codicis fide nixum esse.</q>
(N. T. Vat. Praef. p. xxvi.)</note>, from the
corrections of a second yet ancient scribe (B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>), and those of
the person (B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>) who retraced the faded writing at a later period<note place='foot'>It may be mere oversight that in Matt. xxvii. 4 he does not say in 1867
of what hand the marginal δικαιον is: in his eighth edition (1865) he adjudges
it to B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>. In Matt. xxiv. 23 πιστευητε and ver. 32 εκφύη he gives to B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> in 1867
what he had assigned to B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> in 1865. The Roman Commentary gives no light in
the other places, but assigns πιστεύητε to B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>, B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>.</note>.
One notion, taken up by Tischendorf in the course of his
collation in 1866, was received at first with general incredulity
by other scholars. He has pronounced a decided opinion,
not only that Codd. א and B are documents of the same
age, but that the scribe who wrote the latter is one of the
four [D] to whose diligence we owe the former. That there
should be a general similarity in the style of the two great
codices is probable enough, although the letters in Cod. א are
about half as large again as those of its fellow, but such as are
aware of the difficulty of arriving at a safe conclusion as to
identity of penmanship after close and repeated comparison of
one document with another, will hardly attach much weight to
the impression of any person, however large his experience,
who has nothing but memory to trust to. Tregelles, who has
also seen both copies, states that Cod. א looks much the fresher
and clearer of the two. Yet the reasons alleged above, which
are quite independent of the appearance of the handwriting,
leave scarcely a doubt that Tischendorf's judgement was correct.
</p>

<p>
The Roman edition, projected by Vercellone and Cozza
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
under the auspices of Pius IX, was designed to consist of six
volumes, four containing the Old Testament, one the New,
another being devoted to the notes and discrimination of corrections
by later hands. The New Testament appeared in 1868<note place='foot'><q>Bibliorum Sacrorum Graecus Codex Vaticanus, Auspice Pio IX Pontifice
Maximo, collatis studiis Caroli Vercellone Sodalis Barnabitae, et Josephi Cozza
Monachi Basiliani editus. Romae typis et impensis S. Congregationis de Propaganda
Fide,</q> square folio, 1868.</note>,
a second volume in 1869, containing the text from Genesis to
Joshua; three more have since completed the Old Testament
(1870, 1871, 1872). The learned, genial, and modest Vercellone
(b. 1814) died early in 1869, so that the later volumes bear on
their title-page the mournful inscription <q>Carolum Vercellone
excepit Caietanus Sergio Sodalis Barnabites</q> as Cozza's associate.
These editors fared but ill whether as Biblical critics or as general
scholars, under the rough handling of Tischendorf, whom the
wiser policy of Vercellone had kept in good humour, but whose
powers his successors greatly undervalued. There seems, however,
to be no great cause, in spite of their adversary's minute
diligence in fault-finding (Appendix N. T. Vatic. 1869, p. xi,
&amp;c.)<note place='foot'>The feeble rejoinder of the Roman editors was followed up in 1870 by
Tischendorf's Responsa ad Calumnias Romanas, &amp;c., the tone of which pamphlet
we cannot highly praise.</note>, for doubting their general correctness, although they
persist in placing on the page with the rest of their text readings
which are known or credibly stated to be of decidedly
later date, in spite of the incongruousness of the mixture
of what was original with matter plainly adscititious<note place='foot'>This practice is plainly confessed to in the Preface to the volume of 1881
(p. xvi) without any consciousness of the fatal mistake which it involves:
<q>Facies libri Vaticani repraesentata est [ut] ea primum omnia apparerent, quae
a priore codicis notario profecta adhuc manifesto perspiciuntur, tum ea tantum
a posterioribus sive emendatoribus, sive instauratoribus commutata adderentur,
quae sine scripturae confusione legi possent.</q></note>. Thus
in the Roman edition αδελφων μου των Matt. xxv. 40,
imputed by Tischendorf to B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> and B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>, stands in the margin
just in the same way as ο γαμος Matt. xxii. 10, which he refers
to the first hand. But this is only one instance of a lack of
judgement which deforms every page of their performance:
e.g. Matt. xix. 12; xxiii. 26; 37; xxv. 16; xxvii. 12; 13; 45;
xxviii. 15; Acts xv. 1: all which places exhibit, undistinguished
from emendations of the original scribe or his <q>corrector,</q> readings
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
in the margin or between the lines which Tischendorf asserts
to belong mostly to B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>, a few to B<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>.<note place='foot'>In 1 Cor. vii. 29 Vercellone joins ἐστιν and το closely, but Tischendorf
leaves a space between them, with a middle point, which he expressly states to
be <foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign>. Again, in ver. 34 Vercellone joins μεμερισται with the following
και. Tischendorf in 1867 (but not in his last edition of the N. T.) interposes
a point and space. In these <foreign rend='italic'>minutiae</foreign> Vercellone, who was not working against
time, may be presumed to be the more accurate of the two. The editors of the
sixth volume have no note at either place. Tischendorf detects an error of
Vercellone, ειτε for ειχε Heb. ix. 1, but this has been corrected by the hand in
some copies of the Roman volume, as also in the Commentary.</note>
</p>

<p>
At length, after baffling delays only too readily accounted
for by the public calamities of the Papal state, the concluding
volume of this sumptuous and important work was published
late in 1881. Sergius had now retired through failing eyesight,
and his place was taken by <q>Henricus Canonicus Fabiani,</q>
Cozza (who is now Abbot of the Grotta Ferrata at Tusculum
near Frascati, the chief seat of the monks of the Greek order
of St. Basil) still holding the second place. From the laudatory
tone in which the latter is spoken of (p. xiv), it would seem
that the Preface was written by his new colleague, who
acknowledges the help of U. Ubaldi and the Basilian monk
Ant. Rocchi, all three <q>adjutoribus et administris miratis
equidem se tantis viris adjutores et successores datos</q> (p. xv).
This Preface consists of twenty-two pages, and contains
almost nothing that is interesting to the critic, much that
displays superficial and newly-acquired acquaintance with
the whole subject. Fabiani assigns the end of the fourth
century as the date of the manuscript, regarding it as only
a few years older than the Sinaitic copy<note place='foot'><p>His reasons for regarding the Sinaitic manuscript as the younger (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>,
note 2) are valid enough so far as they go (Praef. p. vi): its initial letters stand
out more from the line of the writing; abridgements of words are fewer and less
simple; it contains the Ammonian sections and Eusebian canons instead of the
antiquated divisions of its rival, and the text is broken up into smaller paragraphs.
Tregelles, who had seen both copies, used to plead the fresher appearance
of the Sinaitic, contrasted with the worn look of the Vatican MS.; but then
its extensive hiatus proves that the latter had been less carefully preserved.
</p>
<p>
Eusebius sent to Constantine's new city (Euseb. Vit. Const. Lib. iv) πεντήκοντα
σωμάτια ἐν διφθέραις (c. 36) ... ἐν πολυτελῶς ἠσκημένοις τεύχεσι τρισσὰ καὶ
τετρασσά (c. 37): on which last words Valesius notes, <q>Codices enim membranacei
ferè per quaterniones digerebantur, hoc est quatuor folia simul compacta,
ut terniones tria sunt folia simul compacta. Et quaterniones quidem sedecim
habebant paginas, terniones vero duodenas.</q> But now that we have come to
know that Cod. B is arranged in quires of five sheets (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>), that manuscript
will hardly answer to the description τρισσὰ καὶ τετρασσά (see p. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, note 1)
as Cod. א does. Indeed Canon Cook (Revised Version, &amp;c., p. 162) objects
to Valesius' explanation altogether, on the ground that his sense would rather
require τριπλόα καὶ τετραπλόα, and that the rare words τρισσά (<q>three by three</q>)
and τετρασσά (<q>four by four</q>) exactly describe the arrangement of three columns
on a page in Cod. B, and four on a page in Cod. א. The Canon has since
observed that the same view is maintained by O. von Gebhardt (<q>Bibel-text</q> in
Herzog's Real-Encyklopädie, Leipsic 1878, second edition). On the other hand
Archdeacon Palmer, in an obliging communication made to me, comparing the
words πεντήκοντα σωμάτια ἐν διφθέραις ἐγκατασκεύοις (c. 36) with ἐν πολυτελῶς ἠσκημένοις
τεύχεσιν τρισσὰ καὶ τετρασσὰ διαπεμψάντων ἡμῶν, and interpreting Eusebius'
compliance (c. 37) by means of Constantine's directions (c. 36), is inclined to
refer τρισσὰ καὶ τετρασσά to σωμάτια, as if it were <q>we sent abroad the collections
[of writings] in richly adorned cases, three or four in a case.</q> It will probably
be thought that the expression is on the whole too obscure to be depended on for
any controversial purposes. It is safer to argue that if the sections and canons
extant in Cod. א be by a contemporary hand (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, and Dean Gwynn's
<hi rend='italic'>Memoranda</hi> in our <hi rend='italic'>Addenda</hi> for that page), that circumstance, the great antiquity
of the manuscript considered, will confirm the probability of Eusebius' connexion
with it. Eusebius agrees also with א in omitting ἡ πύλη, Matt. vii. 13, and
knew of copies, not however the best or with his approval, which inserted ἡσαΐου
before τοῦ προφήτου in Matt. xiii. 35: א being the only uncial which exhibits
that reading. So again Eusebius after Origen maintains the impossible number
ἑκατὸν ἑξήκοντα of א and a few others in Luke xxiv. 13. Dr. C. R. Gregory, Prolegomena,
pp. 347, 348, inclines to the belief that B and א were among the fifty
MSS. sent by Eusebius to Constantino about <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 331-2. Canon Cook's entire
argument (Revised Version of the First Three Gospels (1882), pp. 160-165) should
be consulted.</p></note>, whose discovery he
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
hails without a vestige of ungenerous jealousy: <q>Quorum tale
est demum par, ut potius liber Vaticanus gaudere debeat quod
tam sui similem invenerit fratrem, quam expavescere quod
aemulum</q> (p. viii). Since that time a splendid edition has been
issued of the New Testament in 1889, and the Old in 1890,
under the care of the Abbate Cozza-Luzi, in which the whole
is beautifully exhibited in photograph: so that all students
can now examine for themselves the readings and characteristics
of this celebrated manuscript with all but the advantage which
is given in an examination of the original vellum itself (Novum
Testamentum e Codd. Vat. 1209, &amp;c. Rom. 1889, 4to): and
gratitude is due from all textual scholars to the authorities of
the Vatican.
</p>

<p>
Those who agree the most unreservedly respecting the age of
the Codex Vaticanus, vary widely in their estimate of its critical
value. By some it has been held in such undue esteem that its
readings, if probable in themselves, and supported (or even
though not supported) by two or three other copies and versions,
have been accepted in preference to the united testimony of all
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
authorities besides: while others, admitting the interest due to
age, have spoken of its text as one of the most vicious extant.
Without anticipating what must be discussed hereafter we may
say at once, that, while we accord to Cod. B at least as much
weight as to any single document in existence, we ought never to
forget that it is but one out of many, several of them being nearly
(and one quite) as old, and in other respects not less worthy of
confidence than itself. One marked feature, characteristic of this
copy, is the great number of its omissions, which has induced
Dr. Dobbin to speak of it as presenting <q>an abbreviated text of
the New Testament:</q> and certainly the facts he states on this
point are startling enough<note place='foot'>Dublin University Magazine, Nov. 1859, p. 620. Even Bishop Lightfoot,
a strong and consistent admirer of the manuscript, speaks of its <q>impatience of
apparently superfluous words</q> (Epistle to the Colossians, p. 316). Dr. Hort
(Introduction, p. 235) pleads that such facts <q>have no bearing on either the
merits or the demerits of the scribe of B, except as regards the absolutely
singular readings of B,</q> whereas multitudes of these omissions are found in
other good documents.</note>. He calculates that Codex B leaves
out words or whole clauses no less than 330 times in Matthew,
365 in Mark, 439 in Luke, 357 in John, 384 in the Acts, 681
in the surviving Epistles; or 2,556 times in all. That no small
proportion of these are mere oversights of the scribe seems
evident from the circumstance that this same scribe has repeatedly
written words and clauses <emph>twice over</emph>, a class of mistakes which
Mai and the collators have seldom thought fit to notice, inasmuch
as the false addition has not been retraced by the second hand,
but which by no means enhances our estimate of the care
employed in copying this venerable record of primitive Christianity<note place='foot'>Dean Burgon cites four specimens of such repetitions: Matt. xxi. 4, five
words written twice over; ib. xxvi. 56-7, six words; Luke i. 37, three words or
one line; John xvii. 18, six words. These, however, are but a few out of many.
Nor is Tischendorf's judgement at variance with our own. Speaking of some
supposed or possible gross <emph>errata</emph> of the recent Roman edition, he puts in the
significant proviso <q>tamen haec quoque satis cum universâ scripturae Vaticanae
vitiositate conveniunt</q> (Appendix N. T. Vaticani, 1869, p. xvii).</note>.
Hug and others have referred the origin of Codex B to
Egypt, but (unlike in this respect to Codex A) its history does
not confirm their conjecture, and the argument derived from
orthography or grammatical forms, is now well understood to
be but slight and ambiguous<note place='foot'>The latest Roman editors incline to an Egyptian origin, rather than one
suggested in Magna Graecia, but the only fresh reason they allege can have very
slight weight, namely, that two of the damaged leaves have been repaired by
pieces of papyrus. The learned Ceriani of Milan believes that Cod. B was
written in Italy, Cod. א in Palestine or Syria (Quarterly Review, April, 1882,
p. 355). The supposed Eusebian origin of both has been already stated.</note>. Dr. Hort, on no very substantial
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
grounds, is <q>inclined to surmise that B and א were both written
in the West, probably at Rome</q> (Introduction, pp. 265-7).
</p>

<p>
C. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Ephraemi</hi>, No. 9, in the Royal Library of Paris, is
a most valuable palimpsest containing portions of the Septuagint
version of the Old Testament on sixty-four leaves, and fragments
of every part of the New on 145 leaves, amounting on the whole
to less than two-thirds of the volume<note place='foot'>As this manuscript is of first-rate importance it is necessary to subjoin a full
list of the passages it contains, that it may not be cited <foreign rend='italic'>e silentio</foreign> for what it does
not exhibit: Matt. i. 2-v. 15; vii. 5-xvii. 26; xviii. 28-xxii. 20; xxiii. 17-xxiv.
10; xxiv. 45-xxv. 30; xxvi. 22-xxvii. 11; xxvii. 47-xxviii. 14: Mark i.
17-vi. 31; viii. 5-xii. 29; xiii. 19-xvi. 20: Luke i. 2-ii. 5; ii. 42-iii. 21;
iv. 25-vi. 4; vi. 37-vii. 16 or 17; viii. 28-xii. 3; xix. 42-xx. 27; xxi. 21-xxii.
19; xxiii. 25-xxiv. 7; xxiv. 46-53: John i. 1-41; iii. 33-v. 16; vi. 38-vii.
3; viii. 34-ix. 11; xi. 8-46; xiii. 8-xiv. 7; xvi. 21-xviii. 36; xx. 26-xxi. 25:
Acts i. 2-iv. 3; v. 35-x. 42; xiii. 1-xvi. 36; xx. 10-xxi. 30; xxii. 21-xxiii.
18; xxiv. 15-xxvi. 19; xxvii. 16-xxviii. 4: James i. 1-iv. 2: 1 Pet. i. 2-iv.
6: 2 Pet. i. 1-1 John iv. 2: 3 John 3-15: Jude 3-25: Rom. i. 1-ii. 5; iii. 21-ix.
6; x. 15-xi. 31; xiii. 10-1 Cor. vii. 18; ix. 6-xiii. 8; xv. 40-2 Cor. x. 8: Gal.
i. 20-vi. 18: Eph. ii. 18-iv. 17: Phil. i. 22-iii. 5: Col. i. 1-1 Thess. ii. 9:
Heb. ii. 4-vii. 26; ix. 15-x. 24; xii. 15-xiii. 25: 1 Tim. iii. 9-v. 20; vi. 21-Philem.
25: Apoc. i. 2-iii. 19; v. 14-vii. 14; vii. 17-viii. 4; ix. 17-x. 10; xi. 3-xvi.
13; xviii. 2-xix. 5. Of all the books only 2 John and 2 Thess. are entirely
lost; about thirty-seven chapters of the Gospels, ten of the Acts, forty-two of the
Epistles, eight of the Apocalypse have perished. The order of the books is indicated,
p. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>.</note>. This manuscript seems
to have been brought from the East by Andrew John Lascar
[d. 1535], a learned Greek patronized by Lorenzo de' Medici; it
once belonged to Cardinal Nicolas Ridolphi of that family, was
brought into France by Queen Catherine de' Medici of evil
memory, and so passed into the Royal Library at Paris<note place='foot'>The following Medicean manuscripts seem to have come into the Royal
Library by the same means; Evan. 16, 19, 42, 317. Act. 12, 126. Paul. 164. It
appears therefore that Cod. C was not one of the manuscripts bought of Marshal
Strozzi (Pattison, Life of Is. Casaubon, p. 202), which were only 800 out of the
4,500 which belonged to the Queen (ibid. p. 204).</note>. The
ancient writing is barely legible, having been almost removed
about the twelfth century to receive some Greek works of
St. Ephraem, the great Syrian Father [299-378]. A chemical
preparation applied at the instance of Fleck in 1834, though it
revived much that was before illegible, has defaced the vellum
with stains of various colours, from green and blue to black and
brown. The older writing was first noticed by Peter Allix
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
nearly two centuries ago; various readings extracted from it
were communicated by Boivin to Kuster, who published them
(under the notation of Paris 9) in his edition of Mill's N. T.,
1710. A complete collation of the New Testament was first
made in 1716 by Wetstein, then very young, for Bentley's projected
edition, for which labour (as he records the fact himself)
he paid Wetstein £50. This collation Wetstein of course used
for his own Greek Testament of 1751-2, and though several
persons subsequently examined the manuscript, and so became
aware that more might be gathered from it, it was not until
1843 that Tischendorf brought out at Leipsic his full and noble
edition of the New Testament portion; the Old Testament he
published in 1845. Although Tischendorf complains of the
typographical errors made in his absence in the former of these
two volumes, and has corrected them in the other, they probably
comprise by far the most masterly production of this nature up
to that date published; it is said too that none but those who
have seen Codex C can appreciate the difficulty of deciphering
some parts of it<note place='foot'>Bp. Chr. Wordsworth (N. T. Part iv. p. 159) reminds us of Wetstein's statement
(Bentley's Correspondence, p. 501) that it had cost him two hours to read
one page; so that his £50 were not so easily earned, after all. This collation is
preserved in Trinity College Library, B. xvii. 7, 9.</note>, in fact, whatever is not patent at first sight.
The Prolegomena are especially valuable; the uncial type does
not aim at being an imitation, but the facsimile faithfully
represents the original, even to the present colour of the ink.
In shape Codex C is about the size of Cod. A, but not quite
so tall; its vellum is hardly so fine as that of Cod. A and
a few others, yet sufficiently good. In this copy there is but one
column in a page, which contains from forty to forty-six lines
(usually forty-one), the characters being a little larger than those
of either A or B, and somewhat more elaborate<note place='foot'>Dr. Hort, with his ever ready acuteness, draws certain inferences to be
discussed hereafter from the fact that a displacement in the leaves of the
exemplar wherefrom the Apocalypse in Cod. C was copied, which the scribe
of C did not notice, proves it to have been a book of nearly 120 small leaves,
and accordingly that it <q>formed a volume either to itself or without considerable
additions</q> (Introduction, p. 268).</note>. Thus the points
at the ends of <hi rend='italic'>sigma</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>epsilon</hi>, and especially of the horizontal
line of <hi rend='italic'>tau</hi> are more decided than in Codex A; <hi rend='italic'>delta</hi>, though
not so fully formed as in later books, is less simple than in A,
the strokes being of less equal thickness, and the base more
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
ornamented. On the other hand, <hi rend='italic'>alpha</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>pi</hi> are nearer the
model of Codex B. <hi rend='italic'>Iota</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>upsilon</hi>, which in Cod. A and
many other copies have two dots over them when they commence
a syllable, and are sometimes found with one dot, have
here a small straight line in their place (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>). There are
no breathings or accents by the first hand: the apostrophus is
found but rarely, chiefly with Proper names, as <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>δαδ᾽</hi> The uncial
writing is continuous; the punctuation of Cod. C, like that of A
and B, consisting only of a single point, mostly but not always
put level with the top of the preceding letter; wherever such
a point was employed, a space of one letter broad was usually
left vacant: these points are most common in the later books
of the N. T. The κεφάλαια are not placed in the upper margin of
the page as in Cod. A, but a list of their τίτλοι preceded each
Gospel: the so-called Ammonian sections stand in the margin,
but not at present the Eusebian canons; though, since lines of
the text written in vermilion have been thoroughly washed out,
the canons (for which that colour was commonly employed)
may easily have shared the same fate (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>). There is no
trace of chapters in the Acts, Epistles, or Apocalypse, and both
the titles and subscriptions to the various books are very simple.
Capital letters are used quite as freely as in Cod. A, both at the
commencement of the (Ammonian) sections, and in many other
places. All these circumstances taken together indicate for
Cod. C as early a date as the fifth century, though there is
no sufficient cause for deeming it at all older than Cod. A.
Alexandria has been assigned as its native country, for the very
insufficient reasons stated when we were describing A and B.
It is carefully transcribed, and of its great critical value there is
no doubt; its text seems to stand nearly midway between A and
B, somewhat inclining to the latter. Two correctors have been
very busily at work on Cod. C, greatly to the perplexity of the
critical collator: they are respectively indicated by Tischendorf
as C**, C***. The earliest, or the second hand, may have been
of the sixth century, and his corrections are for some cause
regarded by Dr. Hort as almost equally valuable for critical
purposes with the manuscript itself: the second corrector, or
the third hand, is perhaps of the ninth century, and he
revised such portions as were adapted to ecclesiastical use,
inserting many accents, the <emph>rough</emph> breathing, and some vocal
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
notes. By him or more probably by a fourth hand (who did
not change the text, but added some liturgical directions in the
margin) small crosses were interpolated as stops, agreeably to
the fashion of their times.
</p>

<p>
D <hi rend='smallcaps'>of the Gospels and Acts, Codex Bezae Graeco-Latinus</hi>,
belongs to the University Library at Cambridge, where the open
volume is conspicuously exhibited to visitors in the New
Building (Nn. ii. 41). It was presented to the University in
1581 by Theodore Beza, for whom and his master Calvin the
heads of that learned body then cherished a veneration which
already boded ill for the peace of the English Church<note place='foot'>Very remarkable is the language of the University in returning thanks for
the gift: <q>Nam hoc scito, post unicae scripturae sacratissimam cognitionem, nullos
unquam ex omni memoriâ temporum scriptores extitisse, quos memorabili viro
Johanni Calvino tibique praeferamus.</q> Scrivener's Codex Bezae, Introd. p. vi.</note>. Between
the Gospels (whose order was spoken of above, pp. <ref target='Pg072'>72-4</ref>)
and the Acts, the Catholic Epistles once stood, of which only
a few verses remain in the Latin translation (3 John ver. 11-15),
followed by the words <q>epistulae Johannis III explicit, incipit
actus apostolorum,</q> as if St. Jude's Epistle were displaced or
wanting. There are not a few hiatus both in the Greek and
Latin texts<note place='foot'>Matt. i. 1-20; vi. 20-ix. 2; xxvii. 2-12: John i. 16-iii. 26: Acts viii.
29-x. 14; xxi. 2-10; 15-18 (though Ussher, Mill, Wetstein and Dickinson
cite several readings from these verses, which must have been extant in their
time); xxii. 10-20; 29-xxviii. 31 in the <emph>Greek</emph>: Matt. i. 1-11; vi. 8-viii.
27; xxvi. 65-xxvii. 1: John i. 1-iii. 16: Acts viii. 20-x. 4; xx. 31-xxi. 2;
7-10; xxii. 2-10; xxii. 20-xxviii. 31 in the <emph>Latin</emph>. The original writing has
perished in the following, which are supplied by a scribe of not earlier than
the ninth century: Matt. iii. 7-16: Mark xvi. 15-20: John xviii. 14-xx. 13
in the <emph>Greek</emph>: Matt. ii. 21-iii. 7: Mark xvi. 6-20: John xviii. 2-xx. 1 in the
<emph>Latin</emph>. A fragment, containing a few words of Matt. xxvi. 65-67 (Latin) and
xxvii. 2 (Greek), (Fol. 96, Scrivener), was overlooked by Kipling.</note>. The contents of this remarkable document were
partially made known by numerous extracts from it, under the
designation of β´ in the margin of Robert Stephen's Greek
Testament of 1550, whose account of it is that it was collated
for him in Italy by his friends (τὸ δὲ β´ ἐστὶ τὸ ἐν Ἰταλίᾳ ὑπὸ τῶν
ἡμετέρων ἀντιβληθὲν φίλων. Epistle to the Reader)<note place='foot'>It is surprising that any one should have questioned the identity of Cod. D
with Stephen's β´. No other manuscript has been discovered which agrees with
β´ in the many singular readings and arbitrary additions in support of which it
is cited by Stephen. That he omitted so many more than he inserted is no
argument against their identity, since we know that he did the same in the
case of his α´ (the Complutensian Polyglott) and η´ (Codex L, Paris 62). The
great inaccuracy of Stephen's <emph>margin</emph> (the text is much better revised) is so
visible from these and other well-ascertained instances that no one ought to
wonder if β´ is alleged occasionally (not often) for readings which D does not
contain. On a careful analysis of all the variations imputed to β´ by Stephen,
they will be found to amount to 389 in the parts written in the original hand,
whereof 309 are alleged quite correctly, forty-seven a little loosely, while in eight
instances corrected readings are regarded in error as from the original scribe.
Of the twenty-five places which remain, all but three had been previously discovered
in other copies used by Stephen, so that β´ in their case has been
substituted by mistake for some other numeral. One of the three remaining
has recently been accounted for by Mr. A. A. Vansittart, who has found καὶ
περισσευθήσεται added to δοθήσεται αὐτῷ (Luke viii. 18 from Matt. xiii. 12) in
Stephen's θ´ or Coislin 200 at Paris (No. 38, of the Gospels). I do not find β´
cited by Stephen after Acts xx. 24, except indeed in Rom. iii. 10 (with α´), in
manifest error, just as in the Apocalypse xix. 14 ε´ (No. 6 of the Gospels), which
does not contain this book, is cited instead of ιε´; or as ια´ is quoted in xiii. 4,
<emph>but not elsewhere in the Apocalypse</emph>, undoubtedly in the place of ιϛ´; or as ιϛ´, which
had broken off at xvii. 8, reappears instead of ιε´ in xx. 3. In the various places
named in the last note, wherein the Greek of Cod. D is lost, β´ is cited only at
Matt. xxvii. 3, beyond question instead of η´; and for <emph>part</emph> of the reading in
Acts ix. 31, δ´ (to which the whole rightly belongs) being alleged for the other
part. In John xix. 6, indeed, where the original Greek is missing, β´ is cited,
but it is for a reading actually extant in the modern hand which has there
supplied Codex D's defects.</note>. It is not
very easy to reconcile this statement with Beza's account prefixed
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
to the manuscript and still extant in his own cramped
handwriting, wherein he alleges that he obtained the volume in
1562 from the monastery of St. Irenaeus at Lyons (<q>oriente ibi
civili bello</q>), where it had long lain buried (<q>postquam ibi in
pulvere diu jacuisset</q>). This great city, it must be remembered,
was sacked in that very year by the infamous Des Adrets, whom
it suited to espouse for a while the cause of the Huguenots; and
we can hardly doubt that some one who had shared in the
plunder of the abbey<note place='foot'><q>Ils s'emparèrent des portes et de tous les lieux forts ... non pas sans leur
impiétes et barbaries accoutumées envers les choses saintes</q> (Mézeray, Hist.
de France, tom. iii. p. 87, 1685). Accordingly, travellers are shown to this day
the bones of unclean animals which the Huguenots, in wanton mockery, then
mingled with the presumed remains of St. Irenaeus and the martyrs of Lyons.</note> conveyed this portion of it to Beza,
whose influence at that juncture was paramount among the
French Reformed<note place='foot'>One cannot understand why Wetstein (N. T. Proleg. vol. i, 30) should have
supposed that Beza <emph>prevaricated</emph> as to the means whereby he procured his manuscript.
He was not the man to be at all ashamed of spoiling the Philistines,
and the bare mention of Lyons in connexion with the year 1562 would have
been abundantly intelligible scarce twenty years afterwards. It is however
remarkable that in the last edition of his Annotations (1598) he nowhere calls
it Codex Lugdunensis, but <hi rend='italic'>Claromontanus</hi> (notes on Luke xix. 26; Acts xx. 3);
for, though it might be natural that Beza, at eighty years of age and after the
lapse of so long a time, should confound the Lyons copy with his own Codex
Claromontanus of St. Paul's Epistles (D); yet the only way in which we can
account for the Codex Bezae being collated in <emph>Italy</emph> for Stephen, is by adopting
Wetstein's suggestion that it was the actual copy (<q>antiquissimum codicem
Graecum</q>) taken to the Council of Trent in 1546 by William a Prato, Bishop of
Clermont in Auvergne, to confirm the Latin reading in John xxi. 22 <q>sic eum volo,</q>
which D alone may seem to do. Some learned man (ὑπὸ τῶν ἡμετέρων φίλων does
not well suit his son Henry) might have sent to Robert Stephen from Tren the
readings of a manuscript to which attention had been thus specially directed.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>

<p>
Beza in his editions of the Greek Testament published in
1582, 1589, and 1598, made some occasional references to the
readings of his manuscript. Archbishop Whitgift borrowed it
from Cambridge in 1583, and caused a poor transcript to be
made of its Greek text, which he bequeathed to Trinity College
(whereof he had been Master), in whose Library it still remains
(B. x. 3).
</p>

<p>
Patrick Young, of whom we have heard in connexion with
Cod. A (p. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref> and note 1), sent extracts from Cod. D to the
brothers Dupuy at Paris, through whom they reached Morinus
and Steph. Curcellaeus. An unusually full collation was made
for Walton's Polyglott (Tom. vi, Num. xvi, 1657) by pious
Archbishop Ussher, who devoted to these studies the doleful
leisure of his latter years. Mill collated and Wetstein transcribed
(1716) this document for their great editions of the
Greek Testament, but they both did their work carelessly; and
though Bentley was allowed to keep it at home for seven
years, his notices of its readings, as represented by Mr. Ellis
(Bentleii Critica Sacra, pp. 2-26), or preserved in Stephen's
N. T. of 1549 (Trin. Coll. B. xvii. 4), were put to no practical
use. The best collation by far was made about 1732 by John
Dickinson of St. John's College for John Jackson of Leicester,
with whose other books it came into Jesus College Library
(O. θ. 2), where it has lain neglected. But a manuscript
replete as this is with variations from the sacred text beyond all
other example could be adequately represented only by being
published in full; a design entrusted by the University of
Cambridge to Dr. Thomas Kipling, Senior Wrangler in 1768
and afterwards Dean of Peterborough [d. 1822], whose <q>Codex
Theodori Bezae Cantabrigiensis</q> 1793, 2 vols. fol. (in type
imitating the original handwriting much more closely than in
Cod. A and the rest), is a not unfaithful transcript of the text<note place='foot'>Not more than eighty-three typographical errors have been detected in
Kipling throughout his difficult task, whereof sixteen are in his Annotations,
&amp;c.</note>,
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
though the Prolegomena too plainly testify to the editor's
pitiable ignorance of sacred criticism, while his habit of placing
the readings of the several later hands (very loosely distinguished
from each other) in the text, and those of the first
hand in the notes (a defect we have also noted in the Roman
editions of Cod. B), renders his volumes very inconvenient for
use. Let Kipling be praised for the care and exact diligence
his work evinces, but Herbert Marsh [1757-1839] was of all
Cambridge men of that period the only one known to be competent
for such a task. In 1864 the present writer was aided
by the Syndics of the Cambridge Press in publishing an edition
of Codex Bezae in common type, illustrated by a copious Introduction
and critical notes, to which work the reader is referred
for fuller information respecting this manuscript.
</p>

<p>
The Codex Bezae is a quarto volume 10 inches high by
8 broad, with one column on a page, the Greek text and its
Latin version being parallel, the Greek on the left, or <foreign rend='italic'>verso</foreign> of
each leaf, and the Latin on the right, opposite to it, on the <foreign rend='italic'>recto</foreign>
of the next. Notwithstanding the Alexandrian forms that
abound in it as much as in any other copy, and which have
been held by some to prove the Egyptian origin of Codd. ABC,
the fact of its having a Latin version sufficiently attests its
Western origin. The vellum is not quite equal in fineness
to that of a few others. There are thirty-three lines in every
page, and these of unequal length, as this manuscript is arranged
in στίχοι, being the earliest in date that is so (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>). The
Latin is placed in the same line and as nearly as possible in the
same order as the corresponding Greek. It has not the larger
κεφάλαια or Eusebian canons, but only the so-called Ammonian
sections, often incorrectly placed, and obviously in a later hand
of about the ninth century. The original absence of these divisions
is no proof that the book was not at first intended for
ecclesiastical use (as some have stated), inasmuch as the sections
and canons were constructed for a very different purpose (<hi rend='italic'>see
above</hi>, pp. <ref target='Pg059'>59-63</ref>), but is another argument for its being copied
in the West, perhaps not far from the place where it rested so
long. Other proofs of its Occidental, perhaps of its Gallican origin,
especially that derived from the style of the Latin version, are
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
collected in Scrivener's edition (Introd. pp. xxxi, xl-xlv). The
characters are of the same size as in C, larger on the whole than
in AB, but betray a later age than any of these, although the
Latin as well as the Greek is written continuously, excepting
that in the titles and subscriptions of the several books (as in
Codd. DH of St. Paul) the words are separated. This copy has
paragraph divisions of unequal length peculiar to itself<note place='foot'>In St. Luke 136 (143 Lat.): in what remains of St. Matthew 583 (590 Lat.),
of St. Mark 148, of St. John 165 (168 Lat.), of the Acts 235. The later παραγραφαί,
indicated by [symbol] (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, note 3), though forty-five out of the forty-nine are
firmly and neatly made, and often resemble in colour the ink of the original
scribe, can be shown to be full four centuries later (Scrivener, Cod. Bezae, Introd.
p. xxviii).</note>. They
are indicated by placing the initial letter out in the margin,
that letter being usually of the same size with the rest, though
sometimes a little larger. Cod. D appears to be the earliest
which exhibits larger letters after a pause in the middle of
a line; but these are not very frequent. Instances of each
case may be noticed in our facsimile (No. <ref target='Plate_XIV'>42</ref>), wherein the shapes
of <hi rend='italic'>kappa</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>rho</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>phi</hi>, as indicated before (pp. <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, note 1, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>,
<ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>), are very observable. The Greek and Latin writing on the
opposite pages are much like each other in appearance, the Latin
letters being round and flowing, not square as in codices a little
earlier in date, such as the Medicean and Vatican fragments of
Virgil. This manuscript has been corrected, first by the original
penman with a light stroke made by a pen nearly empty; after
him by not less than eight or nine different revisers, some nearly
coeval with the Codex itself, others not many centuries old.
The changes they have made, especially when they employed
a knife to scrape away the primitive reading, render too many
places almost illegible. The first scribe often used a sponge to
wash out his error before the ink was well dried in (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>).
In addition to the single point about three-fourths of the height
of a letter up, which often subdivides the στίχοι in both languages
(facsimile, No. <ref target='Plate_XIV'>42</ref>, l. 9) the coarse late hand which inserted the
Ammonian sections placed double dots (:) after the numerals, and
often inserted similar points in the text, before or over the first
letter of a section. Each member of the genealogy in Luke iii
forms a separate στίχος, as in Cod. B: quotations are indicated
by throwing the commencement of the lines which contain
them, both Greek and Latin, about an inch back or less
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
(e.g. Matt. xxvi. 31; Mark i. 2, 3; Acts ii. 34, 35; iv. 25,
26). The first three lines of each book, in both languages,
were written in bright red ink, which was also employed in
the alternate lines of the subscriptions, and in other slight
ornaments. The traces of the scribe's needle and lines (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi>
p. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>) are very visible, the margin ample, and the volume on
the whole in good keeping, though its first extant page (Latin)
is much decayed, and it is stained in parts by some chemical
mixture that has been applied to it. The portions supplied by
a later hand are of course in the uncial Greek and cursive Latin
characters usual at the dates assigned to them. The liturgical
notes in the margin of the Saturday and Sunday lessons
(ανναγνοσμα is the form often used) are in thick letters, of a yet
later date than the Ammonian sections. A few others for the
great Feasts and Fast days occur; and, in a hand of about
the twelfth century, lessons for the Festivals of St. George and
St. Dionysius, the patron saints of England and France, as
may be seen in the table of Menology.
</p>

<p>
The vellum employed for Codex Bezae is arranged in quires of
four sheets (or eight leaves) each even throughout<note place='foot'>Bradshaw (Prothero's Memoirs, p. 97) in a letter to the <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, Jan. 28,
1863, writes thus:&mdash;<q>I saw Cod. א at Leipsig <hi rend='italic'>per</hi> Tischendorf. I had been curious
to know whether it was written in even quaternions throughout, like the Cod.
Bezae, or in a series of fasciculi, each ending with a quire of varying size, like
the Cod. Alexandrinus, and I found the latter to be the case. This, by-the-bye,
is sufficient to prove</q>&mdash;why, is not quite clear&mdash;<q>that it cannot be the volume
which Dr. Simonides speaks of having written at Mount Athos.</q></note>, the numeral
signatures of which are set <foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign> so low down in the
margin at the foot of the last page of each, that they are mostly
cut off, in whole or partly, by the binder. Assuming that
it ended with the Acts of the Apostles, it originally consisted
of upwards of sixty-four (probably of sixty-seven) quires, of
which the first, forty-fourth, and sixty-fourth, have each lost
some leaves, the thirty-fourth is entire though containing but
six leaves, while those signed Γ (3), ΙΔ (14), ΚΒ (22), ΜΕ (45),
down to ΝΒ (52), ΝΖ (57), and all after ΞΔ (64), are wholly
wanting. The result is that out of the 534 leaves it originally
contained, only 406 now survive, about twelve of them being
more or less mutilated. It is not easy to surmise what may
have been written on the sixty-seven leaves that intervened
between ΜΔ 5 and ΝΓ 1; the gap ends with 3 John ver. 11
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
(Greek), but the space is apparently too great for the Catholic
Epistles alone, even though we suppose that Jude was inserted
(as appears in some catalogues) otherwise than in the last
place. The leaves added by later hands are nine in number.
The Greek portion of the supplement to St. John (xviii. 14-xx.
13) much resembles in text the style of the original manuscript,
and is often supported by Codd. אAB(C). The Latin of this
portion is taken from the Vulgate version.
</p>

<p>
The internal character of the Codex Bezae is a most difficult
and indeed an almost inexhaustible theme. No known manuscript
contains so many bold and extensive interpolations (six
hundred, it is said, in the Acts alone), countenanced, where they
are not absolutely unsupported, chiefly by the Old Latin and the
Curetonian version: its own parallel Latin translation is too
servilely accommodated to the Greek text to be regarded as an
independent authority, save where the corresponding Greek
is lost.
</p>

<p>
This passage was penned by Dr. Scrivener before the publication
of the highly ingenious treatise by Mr. Rendel Harris,
entitled <q>A Study of the Codex Bezae</q> (1891), being the beginning
of the second volume of the Cambridge <q>Texts and Studies.</q>
Mr. Harris from curious internal evidence, such as the existence
in the text of a vitiated rendering of a verse of Homer which
bears signs of having been retranslated from a Latin translation,
infers that the Greek has been made up from the Latin, and
traces the latter to the second century. He shows its affinity
with the text of Irenaeus, and discovers traces in it of Montanism.
He opens up many points of interest for any one who would
examine this <q>singular Codex</q>: but injustice must not be done
to the fertile author by supposing that in what is evidently
'a Study' he concludes that he has settled all the numerous
questions which he broaches. No one however can really
investigate the Codex Bezae without studying this work, which
will be found both instructive in the highest degree and
amusing.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V. Uncial Manuscripts Of The Gospels.</head>

<p>
Of the manuscripts hitherto described, Codd. אABC for their
presumed critical value, Cod. D for its numberless and strange
deviations from other authorities, and all five for their high
antiquity, demanded a full description. Of those which follow
many contain but a few fragments of the Gospels, and others
are so recent in date that they hardly exceed in importance
some of the best cursive copies (e.g. FGHS)<note place='foot'>Yet Φ (Beratinus) and Σ (Rossanensis) contain St. Matthew and St. Mark, and
are probably a little older than D.</note>. None of these
need detain us long.
</p>

<p>
E. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Basiliensis</hi> (B vi. 21, now A. N. iii. 12) (κεφ. τ.,
κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am., Eus.</hi> at foot of the pages) contains the four Gospels,
excepting Luke iii. 4-15; xxiv. 47-53, and was written about
the middle of the eighth century, unless (with Dean Burgon) we
refer it to the seventh. It measures 9 x 6-½ inches, and contains
318 folios. There are 247 folios <foreign rend='italic'>verso</foreign>, and 71 <foreign rend='italic'>recto</foreign><note place='foot'>H. C. Hoskier, Collation of Cod. 604, &amp;c. Appendix F. Mr. Hoskier saw
the MS. on May 18, 1886.</note>. Three leaves
(160, 207, 214) on which are Luke i. 69-ii. 4; xii. 58-xiii. 12;
xv. 8-20 are in a cursive and later hand, above the obliterated
fragments of a homily as old as the main body of the manuscript.
There is a <q>liber praedicatorum</q> on the first folio. This
copy is one of the most notable of the later uncials, and might
well have been published at length. It was given to a religious
house in Basle by Cardinal John de Ragusio, who was sent on a
mission to the Greeks by the Council of Basle (1431), and probably
brought it from Constantinople. Erasmus much overlooked it
for later books when preparing his Greek Testament at Basle;
indeed it was not brought into the Public Library there before
1559. A collation was sent to Mill by John Battier, Greek
Professor at Basle: Mill named it B. I, and truly declared it to
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
be <q>probatae fidei et bonae notae.</q> Bengal (who obtained a few
extracts from it) calls it Basil. <hi rend='italic'>a</hi>: but its first real collator was
Wetstein, whose native town it adorns. Since his time, Tischendorf
in 1843, Professor Müller of Basle and Tregelles in
1846, have independently collated it throughout. Judging
from the specimen sent to him, Mill (N. T. Proleg. § 1118)
thought the hand much like that of Cod. A; the uncial letters
(though not so regular or neat) are firm, round, and simple:
indeed <q>the penmanship is exceedingly tasteful and delicate
throughout. The employment of green, blue, and vermilion in
the capitals I do not remember to have met with elsewhere</q>
(Burgon, <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, Jan. 29, 1873). There is but one column of
about twenty-four lines on the page; it has breathings and accents
pretty uniformly, and not ill placed; otherwise, from the shape of
most of the letters (e.g. <hi rend='italic'>pi</hi>, facsimile No. <ref target='Plate_XI'>27</ref>, lines 1, 3), it might
be judged of earlier date: observe, however, the oblong form
of <hi rend='italic'>omicron</hi> where the space is crowded in the last line of
the facsimile, when the older scribes would have retained
the circular shape and made the letter very small (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi>
facsimile No. <ref target='Plate_IV'>11</ref> b. l. 6): <hi rend='italic'>delta</hi> also and <hi rend='italic'>xi</hi> betray a less ancient
scribe. The single stop in Cod. E, as was stated above (p. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>),
changes its place according to the variation of its power, as in
other copies of about the same age. The capitals at the beginning
of sections stand out in the margin as in Codd. AC.
The lists of the larger κεφάλαια together with the numbers of
the sections in the margin and the Eusebian canons beneath
them, as well as harmonizing references to the other Gospels at
the foot of the page, names of Feast days with their Proper
lessons, and other liturgical notices, have been inserted (as some
think, but erroneously in Burgon's judgement) by a later hand.
Under the text (Mark i. 5, 6) are placed the harmonizing references,
in the order (varying in each Gospel) Mark, Luke, John,
Matthew. Ι<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ω</hi> (John) furnishes no parallel on this page. The
first section (α) of Μ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ρ</hi> (Mark i. 1, 2) corresponds to the seventieth
(ο) of Λ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ο</hi> (Luke vii. 27), and to the 103rd (ργ) of M (Matt. xi.
10). Again the second (β) of Mark (i. 3) is parallel to the seventh
(ζ) of Luke (iii. 3), and to the eighth (η) of Matt. (iii. 3). The
passage given in our facsimile (No. <ref target='Plate_XI'>27</ref>) is part of the third (γ) of
Mark (i. 4-6), and answers to nothing in Luke, but to the ninth
(θ) of Matt. (iii. 4-6). See p. <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, note 4. The value of this
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
codex, as supplying materials for criticism, is considerable. It
approaches more nearly than some others of its date to the text
now commonly received, and is an excellent witness for it. The
asterisk is much used to indicate disputed passages: e.g. Matt.
xvi. 2, 3: Luke xxii. 43, 44; xxiii. 34: John viii. 2-11. (For
the fragments attached to this Codex, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Apoc. 15.)
</p>

<p>
F. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Boreeli</hi>, now in the Public Library at Utrecht,
once belonged to John Boreel [d. 1629], Dutch ambassador at
the court of King James I. Wetstein obtained some readings
from it in 1730, as far as Luke xi, but stated that he knew not
where it then was. In 1830 Professor Heringa of Utrecht discovered
it in private hands at Arnheim, and procured it for his
University Library, where in 1850 Tregelles found it, though
with some difficulty, the leaves being torn and all loose in a box,
and he then made a facsimile; Tischendorf had looked through
it in 1841. In 1843, after Heringa's death, H. E. Vinke published
that scholar's <q>Disputatio de Codice Boreeliano,</q> which
includes a full and exact collation of the text. Cod. F contains
the Four Gospels with many defects, some of which have been
caused since the collation was made which Wetstein published:
hence the codex must still sometimes be cited on his authority
as F<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>w</hi>. In fact there are but 204 leaves and a few fragments
remaining, written with two columns of about nineteen lines each
on the page, in a tall, oblong, upright form; it was referred by
Mr. H. Deane in 1876 to the eighth, by Tischendorf to the
ninth, by Tregelles to the tenth century. In St. Luke there
are no less than twenty-four gaps: in Wetstein's collation it
began at Matt. vii. 6, but now at Matt. ix. 1. Other hiatus
are Matt. xii. 1-44; xiii. 55-xiv. 9; xv. 20-31; xx. 18-xxi.
5: Mark i. 43-ii. 8; ii. 23-iii. 5; xi. 6-26; xiv. 54-xv. 5;
xv. 39-xvi. 19: John iii. 5-14; iv. 23-38; v. 18-38; vi. 39-63;
vii. 28-viii. 10; x. 32-xi. 3; xi. 40-xii. 3; xii. 14-25:
it ends at John xiii. 34. Few manuscripts have fallen into
such unworthy hands. The Eusebian canons are wanting, the
sections standing without them in the margin. Thus in Mark
x. 13 (see facsimile No. <ref target='Plate_XI'>28</ref>) the section ρϛ (106) has not under
it the proper canon β (2). The letters <hi rend='italic'>delta</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>epsilon</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>theta</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>omicron</hi>, and especially the cross-like <hi rend='italic'>psi</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>), are of the
most recent uncial form, <hi rend='italic'>phi</hi> is large and bevelled at both
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
ends; the breathings and accents are fully and not incorrectly
given.
</p>

<p>
F<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Coislin.</hi> I is that great copy of the Septuagint
Octateuch, the glory of the Coislin Library, first made known
by Montfaucon (Biblioth. Coislin., 1715), and illustrated by a
facsimile in Silvestre's Paléogr. Univ. No. 65. It contains 227
leaves in two columns, 13 inches by 9: the fine massive uncials
of the sixth or seventh century are much like Cod. A's in general
appearance. In the margin <foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign> Wetstein found Acts
ix. 24, 25, and so inserted this as Cod. F in his list of MSS. of the
Acts. In 1842 Tischendorf observed nineteen other passages of
the New Testament, which he published in his Monumenta sacra
inedita (1846, p. 400, &amp;c.) with a facsimile. The texts are Matt.
v. 48; xii. 48; xxvii. 25: Luke i. 42; ii. 24; xxiii. 21: John v.
35; vi. 53, 55: Acts iv. 33, 34; ix. 24, 25; x. 13, 15; xxii. 22:
1 Cor. vii. 39; xi. 29: 1 Cor. iii. 13; ix. 7; xi. 33: Gal. iv. 21,
22: Col. ii. 16, 17; Heb. x. 26.
</p>

<p>
G. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Harleian.</hi> 5684
or <hi rend='smallcaps'>Wolfii</hi> A;
H. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Wolfii</hi> B.
These two copies were brought
from the East by Andrew Erasmus
Seidel, purchased by La
Croze, and by him presented to J. C. Wolff, who published
loose extracts from them both in his <q>Anecdota Graeca</q> (vol. iii.
1723), and barbarously mutilated them in 1721 in order to send
pieces to Bentley, among whose papers in Trinity College Library
(B. <hi rend='smallcaps'>xvii.</hi> 20) Tregelles found the fragments in 1845 (Account of
the Printed Text, p. 160). Subsequently Cod. G came with the
rest of the Harleian collection into the British Museum; Cod.
H, which had long been missing, was brought to light in the
Public Library of Hamburg, through Petersen the Librarian,
in 1838. Codd. GH have now been thoroughly collated both
by Tischendorf and Tregelles. Cod. G appears to be of the
tenth, Cod. H of the ninth century, and is stated to be of higher
critical value. Besides the mutilated fragments at Trinity
College (Matt. v. 29-31; 39-43 of Cod. G; Luke i. 3-6; 13-15
of Cod. H), many parts of both have perished: viz. in Cod.
G 372 verses; Matt. i. 1-vi. 6; vii. 25-viii. 9; viii. 23-ix.
2; xxviii. 18-Mark i. 13; xiv. 19-25: Luke i. 1-13; v. 4-vii.
3; viii. 46-ix. 5; xii. 27-41; xxiv. 41-53: John xviii.
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
5-19; xix. 4-27 (of which one later hand supplies Matt, xxviii.
18-Mark i. 8: John xviii. 5-19; another Luke xii. 27-41):
in Cod. H 679 verses; Matt. i. 1-xv. 30; xxv. 33-xxvi. 3;
Mark i. 32-ii. 4; xv. 44-xvi. 14; Luke v. 18-32; vi. 8-22;
x. 2-19: John ix. 30-x. 25; xviii. 2-18; xx. 12-25. Cod. G
has some Church notes in the margin; Cod. H the sections
without the Eusebian canons; G however has both sections
and canons; its τίτλοι and larger κεφάλαια are in red (those of
St. John being lost), and the Church notes seem <foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign>.
Each member of the genealogy in Luke iii forms a separate line.
Both G and H are written in a somewhat rude style, with
breathings and accents rather irregularly placed, as was the fashion
of their times; G in two columns of twenty-two lines each on
a page, H in one column of twenty-three lines. In each the latest
form of the uncial letters is very manifest (e.g. <hi rend='italic'>delta</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>theta</hi>), but G
is the neater of the two. In G the single point, in H a kind of
Maltese cross, are the prevailing marks of punctuation. Our
facsimiles (Nos. <ref target='Plate_XI'>29</ref> of G, <ref target='Plate_XII'>31</ref> of H) are due to Tregelles; that of
G he took from the fragment at Trinity College. Inasmuch as
beside Matt. v. 30, 31 in Cod. G ΑΡ [with a χ between and above them] (ἀρχή) is conspicuous in
the margin, and ΤΕ Τ<hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>Η</hi>Σ <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>Λε</hi> (τέλος τῆς λέξεως) stands in the text
itself, good scholars may be excused for having mistaken it for
a scrap of some Evangelistarium.
</p>

<p>
I. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Tischendorfian.</hi> II at St. Petersburg, consists of
palimpsest fragments found by Tischendorf in 1853 <q>in the
dust of an Eastern library,</q> i.e. in the Convent of St. Saba near
the Red Sea, and published in his new series of <q>Monumenta sacra
inedita,</q> vol. i, 1855. On the twenty-eight vellum leaves (eight of
them on four double leaves) Georgian writing covers the partially
obliterated Greek, which is for the most part very hard to read.
They compose portions of no less than seven different manuscripts;
the first two, of the fifth century, are as old as Codd.
AC (the first having scarcely any capital letters and those
very slightly larger than the rest); the third fragment seems of
the sixth century, nearly of the date of Cod. N (p. <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>), about
as old as Cod. P (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>); the fourth scarcely less ancient:
all four, like other palimpsests, have the pseudo-Ammonian
sections without the Eusebian canons (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>).  Of the
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
Gospels we have 190 verses: viz. (<hi rend='italic'>Frag.</hi> 1 or I<hi rend='vertical-align: sub'>a</hi>) John xi. 50-xii.
9; xv. 12-xvi. 2; xix. 11-24: (<hi rend='italic'>Frag.</hi> 2 or I<hi rend='vertical-align: sub'>b</hi>) Matt. xiv.
13-16; 19-23; xxiv. 37-xxv. 1; xxv. 32-45; xxvi. 31-45:
Mark ix. 14-22; xiv. 58-70: (<hi rend='italic'>Frag.</hi> 3 or I<hi rend='vertical-align: sub'>c</hi>) Matt. xvii. 22-xviii.
3; xviii. 11-19; xix. 5-14: Luke xviii. 14-25; John iv.
52-v. 8; xx. 17-26: (<hi rend='italic'>Frag.</hi> 4 or I<hi rend='vertical-align: sub'>d</hi>) Luke vii. 39-49; xxiv.
10-19. The fifth fragment (I<hi rend='vertical-align: sub'>e</hi>), containing portions of the Acts
and of St. Paul's Epistles (1 Cor. xv. 53-xvi. 9; Tit. i. 1-13;
Acts xxviii. 8-17) is as old as the third, if not as the first. The
sixth and seventh fragments are of the seventh century: viz.
(<hi rend='italic'>Frag.</hi> 6 or I<hi rend='vertical-align: sub'>f</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>of two leaves</hi>) Acts ii. 6-17; xxvi. 7-18: (<hi rend='italic'>Frag.</hi> 7
or I<hi rend='vertical-align: sub'>g</hi>, <emph>of one leaf</emph>) Acts xiii. 39-46. In all seven are 255 verses.
All except <hi rend='italic'>Frag.</hi> 6 are in two columns of from twenty-nine to
eighteen lines each, and unaccentuated; <hi rend='italic'>Frag.</hi> 6 has but one
column on a page, with some accents. The first five fragments, so
far as they extend, must be placed in the highest rank as critical
authorities. The first, as cited in Tischendorf's eighth edition of
his Greek Testament, agrees with Cod. A thirty-four times, four
times with Cod. B, and twenty-three times with the two united;
it stands alone eleven times. The text of the second and third is
more mixed though they incline more to favour Codd. אB; not,
however, so decidedly as the first does Cod. A. Tischendorf gives
us six facsimiles of them in the <q>Monumenta sacra inedita,</q>. Nova
Collect. vol. i (1885), a seventh in <q>Anecdota sacra et profana,</q> 1855.
From the same Armenian book, as Tischendorf thinks (and he
was very likely to <emph>know</emph>), are taken the three palimpsest leaves
of 2 and 3 Kings, and the six of Isaiah published by him in
the same volume of the <q>Monumenta.</q>
</p>

<p>
I<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>. See <ref target='codex-n-b'>N<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi></ref>, below.
</p>

<p>
K. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Cyprius</hi>, or No. 63 of the Royal Library at
Paris, shares only with Codd. אBMSU the advantage of being
a <emph>complete</emph> uncial copy of the Four Gospels. It was brought
into the Colbert Library from Cyprus in 1673; Mill inserted
its readings from Simon; it was re-examined by Scholz,
whose inaccuracies (especially those committed when collating
Cod. K for his <q>Curae Criticae in Historiam textûs Evangeliorum,</q>
Heidelberg, 1820) have been strongly denounced by later editors,
and it must be feared with too good reason. The independent
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
collations of Tischendorf and Tregelles have now done all
that can be needed for this copy. It is an oblong quarto, in
compressed uncials, of about the middle of the ninth century
at the latest, having one column of about twenty-one lines on
each page, but the handwriting is irregular and varies much in
size. A single point being often found where the sense does
not require it, this codex has been thought to have been copied
from an older one arranged in στίχοι; the ends of each στίχος
may have been indicated in this manner by the scribe. The
subscriptions, τίτλοι, the sections, and indices of the κεφάλαια
of the last three Gospels are believed to be the work of a later
hand: the Eusebian canons are absent. The breathings and
accents are <foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign>, but often omitted or incorrectly
placed. Itacisms and permutations of consonants are very
frequent, and the text is of an unusual and interesting character.
Scholz regards the directions for the Church lessons,
even the ἀρχαί and τέλη in the margin at the beginning and
end of lessons, as by the original scribe. He transcribes at
length the ἐκλογάδιον τῶν δ᾽ εὐαγγελιστῶν and the fragments of
a menology prefixed to Cod. K (N. T. vol. i, pp. 455-493),
of which tables it affords the earliest specimen. The second
hand writes at the end προσδέξηται αὐτὴν [τὴν δέλτον] ἡ παναγία
θεοτόκος καὶ ὁ ἅγιος εὐτύχιος. The style of this copy will be
seen from our facsimile (No. <ref target='Plate_VII'>19</ref>) taken from John vi. 52, 53:
the number of the section (ξϛ´) or 66 stands in the margin,
but the ordinary place of the Eusebian canon (ι or 10) under
it is filled by a simple flourish. The stop in 1. 1 after λεγοντεσ
illustrates the unusual punctuation of this copy, as may that
after ὁ <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ισ</hi> in 1. 3.
</p>

<p>
L. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Regius</hi>, No. 62 in the Royal Library at Paris, is
by far the most remarkable document of its age and class. It
contains the Four Gospels, except the following passages,
Matt. iv. 22-v. 14; xxviii. 17-20: Mark x. 16-30; xv. 2-20:
John xxi. 15-25. It was written in about the eighth century
and consists of 257 leaves quarto, of thick vellum, 9 inches high
by 6-½ broad, with two columns of twenty-five lines each on a page,
regularly marked, as we so often see, by the <foreign rend='italic'>stilus</foreign> and ruler (p. 27).
This is doubtless Stephen's η´, though he cites it erroneously in
Acts xxiv. 7 bis; xxv. 14; xxvii. 1; xxviii. 11: it was even
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
then in the Royal Library, although <q>Roberto Stephano</q> is
marked in the volume. Wetstein collated Cod. L but loosely;
Griesbach, who set a very high value on it, studied it with
peculiar care; Tischendorf published it in full in his <q>Monumenta
sacra inedita,</q> 1846. It is but carelessly written, and abounds
with errors of the ignorant scribe, who was more probably an
Egyptian than a native Greek. The breathings and accents are
often deficient, often added wrongly, and placed throughout
without rule or propriety. The apostrophus also is common, and
frequently out of place; the points for stops are quite irregular,
as we have elsewhere stated (p. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>). Capitals occur plentifully,
often painted and in questionable taste (see facsimile No. <ref target='Plate_IX'>21</ref>,
column 2), and there is a tendency throughout to inelegant
ornament. This codex is in bad condition through damp, the
ink brown or pale, the uncial letters of a debased oblong
shape: <hi rend='italic'>phi</hi> is enormously large and sometimes quite angular;
other letters are such as might be looked for from its date, and
are neither neat nor remarkably clear. The lessons for Sundays,
festivals, &amp;c. and the ἀρχαί and τέλη are marked everywhere in
the margin, especially in St. Matthew; there are also many
corrections and important critical notes (e.g. Mark xvi. 8) in the
text or margin, apparently <foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign>. Our facsimile is taken
from a photograph of its most important page, Mark xvi. 8, 9,
with part of the note cited at length below. Before each Gospel
are indices of the κεφάλαια, now imperfect: we find also the τίτλοι
at the head and occasionally at the foot of the several pages; the
numbers of the κεφάλαια (usually pointed out by the sign of the
cross), the sections and Eusebian canons stand in the inner
margin<note place='foot'>In our facsimile (No. <ref target='Plate_IX'>21</ref>), over against the beginning of Mark xvi. 8, is set
the number of the section (ΣΛΓ or 233), above the corresponding Eusebian
canon (B or 2).</note> often ill put, as if only half understood. The critical
weight of this copy may best be discussed hereafter; it will
here suffice barely to mention its strong resemblance to Cod. B
(less, however, in St. John's Gospel than elsewhere), to the
citations of Origen [186-253], and to the margin of the Harkleian
Syriac version [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 616]. Cod. L abounds in what are
termed Alexandrian forms, beyond any other copy of its date.
</p>

<p>
M. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Campianus</hi>, No. 48 in the Royal Library at Paris,
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
contains the Four Gospels complete in a small quarto form, written
in very elegant and minute uncials of the end of the ninth
century, with two columns of twenty-four lines each on a page.
The Abbé François de Camps gave it to Louis XIV, Jan. 1,
1707. This document is Kuster's 2 (1710); it was collated by
Wetstein, Scholz, and Tregelles; transcribed in 1841 by Tischendorf.
Its synaxarion and menology have been published by
Scholz in the same place as those of Cod. K, and obviously
with great carelessness. Ἀναγνώσματα, i.e. notes of the Church
Lessons, abound in the margin (Tischendorf thinks them <foreign rend='italic'>primâ
manu</foreign>) in a very small hand, like in style to the Oxford Plato
(Clarke 39, <hi rend='italic'>above</hi>, p. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>). We find too Hippolytus' Chronology
of the Gospels, Eusebius' letter to Carpianus with his canons,
and some Arabic scrawl on the last leaf, of which the name
of Jerusalem alone has been read, a note in Slavonic, and
others in a contemporaneous cursive hand. Dean Burgon also
observed at the foot of the several pages the same kind of
harmony as we described for Cod. E. It has breathings, accents
pretty fairly given, and a musical notation in red, so frequent in
Church manuscripts of the age. Its readings are very good;
itacisms and ν ἐφελκυστικόν are frequent. Tischendorf compares
the form of its uncials to those of Cod. V; which, judging from
the facsimile given by Matthaei, we should deem somewhat
less beautiful. From our facsimile (No. <ref target='Plate_XII'>32</ref>) it will be seen that
the round letters are much narrowed, the later form of <hi rend='italic'>delta</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>theta</hi> quite decided, while <hi rend='italic'>alpha</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>pi</hi> might look earlier.
Our specimen (John vii. 53-viii. 2) represents the celebrated
Pericope adulterae in one of its earliest forms.
</p>

<p>
N. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Purpureus.</hi> Only twelve leaves of this beautiful
copy were till recently believed to survive, and some former
possessor must have divided them in order to obtain a better
price from several purchasers than from one. Four leaves are
now in the British Museum (Cotton, Titus C. xv), six in the
Vatican (No. 3785), two at Vienna (Lambec. 2), at the end of
a fragment of Genesis in a different hand. The London fragments
(Matt. xxvi. 57-65; xxvii. 26-34: John xiv. 2-10; xv.
15-22) were collated by Wetstein on his first visit to England in
1715, and marked in his Greek Testament by the letter J:
Scrivener transcribed them in 1845, and announced that they
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
contained fifty-seven various readings, of which Wetstein had
given but five. The Vienna fragment (Luke xxiv. 13-21; 39-49)
had long been known by the descriptions of Lambecius: Wetstein
had called it N; Treschow in 1773 and Alter in 1787 had given
imperfect collations of it. Scholz first noticed the Vatican leaves
(Matt. xix. 6-13; xx. 6-22; xx. 29-xxi. 19), denoted them by Γ,
and used some readings extracted by Gaetano Marini. It was
reserved for Tischendorf (Monumenta sacra inedita, 1846) to
publish them all in full, and to determine by actual inspection
that they were portions of the same manuscript, of the date of
about the end of the sixth century. Besides these twelve leaves
John Sakkelion the Librarian saw in or about 1864 at the
Monastery of St. John in Patmos thirty-three other leaves containing
portions of St. Mark's Gospel (ch. vi. 53-xv. 23)<note place='foot'>Dr. Hort more exactly reckons that these leaves apparently contain Mark
vi. 53-vii. 4; vii. 21-viii. 32; ix. 1-x. 43; xi. 7-xii. 19; xiv. 25-xv. 22
(<hi rend='italic'>Addenda and Corrigenda</hi> to Tregelles's N. T., p. 1019), adding that Tischendorf had
access also to a few verses preserved in the collections of the Russian Bishop
Porphyry. They are published in Duchesne's <q>Archives des Missions scientifiques
et littéraires</q> (Paris, 1877), 3<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> sér. tom. iii. pp. 386-419.</note>, whose
readings were communicated to Tischendorf, and are included in
his eighth edition of the N. T. The others were probably stolen
from the same place. This book is written on the thinnest
vellum (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> pp. <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>), dyed purple, and the silver letters (which
have turned quite black) were impressed in some way upon it,
but are too varied in shape, and at the end of the lines in size,
to admit the supposition of moveable type being used, as some
have thought to be the case in the Codex Argenteus of the Gothic
Gospels. The abridgements <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ΘΣ</hi>, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ΧΣ</hi>, &amp;c. are in gold; and some
changes have been made by an ancient second hand. The so-called
Ammonian sections and the Eusebian canons are faithfully given
(<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>), and the Vatican portion has the forty-first, forty-sixth,
and forty-seventh τίτλοι of St. Matthew at the head of the pages.
Each page has two columns of sixteen lines, and the letters
(about ten or twelve in a line) are firm, uniform, bold, and
unornamented, though not quite so much so as in a few older
documents; their lower extremities are bevelled. Their size is
at least four times that of the letters in Cod. A, the punctuation
quite as simple, being a single point (and that usually neglected)
level with the top of the letter (see our facsimile, Plate <ref target='Plate_V'>v</ref>, No. 14,
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
l. 3), and there is no space left between words even after stops.
A few letters stand out as capitals at the beginning of lines; of
the breathings and accents, if such they be, we have spoken
above (p. <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>). Letters diminished at the end of a line do not
lose their ancient shape, as in many later books: <foreign rend='italic'>compendia
scribendi</foreign> are rare, yet [symbol] stands for Ν at the end of a line no
less than twenty-nine times in the London leaves alone, but [symbol] for
αι only once. Ι at the beginning of a syllable has two dots over
it, Υ but one. We have discussed above (pp. <ref target='Pg032'>32-39</ref>) the shape of
the alphabet in Ν (for by that single letter Tischendorf denotes
it), and compared it with others of nearly the same date; <hi rend='italic'>alpha</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>omega</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lambda</hi> look more ancient than <hi rend='italic'>delta</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>xi</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Plate <ref target='Plate_II'>ii</ref>.
No. 4). It exhibits strong Alexandrian forms, e.g. παραλήμψομε,
ειχοσαν (the latter condemned <foreign rend='italic'>secundâ manu</foreign>), and not a few
such itacisms as the changes of ι and ει, αι and ε.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='codex-n-b'/>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod.</hi> N<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi> (I<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi> of Tischendorf's N. T., eighth edition), <hi rend='smallcaps'>Musei Britannici</hi>
(Addit. 17136), is a 12mo volume containing the hymns
of Severus in Syriac, and is one of the books brought thither
from the Nitrian desert. It is a palimpsest, with a second Syriac
work written below the first, and, under both, <emph>four</emph> leaves (117,
118, 127, 128) contain fragments of seventeen verses of St. John
(xiii. 16; 17; 19; 20; 23; 24; 26; 27; xvi. 7; 8; 9 although
only one word&mdash;περί&mdash;is preserved; 12; 13; 15; 16; 18; 19).
These Tischendorf (and Tregelles about the same time) deciphered
with great difficulty, as every one who has examined the manuscript
would anticipate, and published in the second volume of
his new collection of <q>Monumenta sacra inedita.</q> Each page
contained two columns. We meet with the sections without
the Eusebian canons, the earliest form of uncial characters, no
capital letters (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, note 2), and only the simplest kind of
punctuation, although one rough breathing is legible. Tischendorf
hesitates whether he shall assign the fragment to the fourth
or fifth century. It agrees with Cod. A five or six times, with
Cod. B five, with the two together six, and is against them both
thrice.
</p>

<p>
O. No less than nine small fragments have borne this mark.
O of Wetstein was given by Anselmo Banduri to Montfaucon,
and contains only Luke xviii. 11-14: <emph>this</emph> Tischendorf discards
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
as taken from an Evangelistarium (of the tenth century,
as he judges from the writing) chiefly because it wants the
number of the section at ver. 14. In its room he puts for
Cod. O Moscow Synod. 120 (Matthaei, 15), a few leaves of about
the ninth century (containing the fifteen verses, John i. 1, 3, 4; xx.
10-13; 15-17; 20-24, with some scholia), which had been used
for binding a copy of Chrysostom's Homilies on Genesis, brought
from the monastery of Dionysius at Mount Athos, and published
in Matthaei's Greek Testament with a facsimile (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> ix. 257 &amp;c.,
and facsimile in tom. xii). Further portions of this fragment
were seen at Athos in 1864 by Mr. Philip E. Pusey. Tregelles
has also appended it to his edition of Cod. Ξ. In this fragment
we find the cross-like <hi rend='italic'>psi</hi>, the interrogative <q>;</q> (John xx.
13), and the comma (ib. ver. 12). Alford's Frag. Ath. b=Tisch.
W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi>&mdash;p. 145&mdash;and Frag. Ath. a are probably parts of O. The
next five comprise N. T. hymns.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod.</hi> O<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Magnificat</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Benedictus</hi> in Greek uncials of the
eighth or ninth century, in a Latin book at Wolfenbüttel, is
published by Tischendorf, Anecdota sacr. et prof. 1855; as is
also O<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>, which contains these two and <hi rend='italic'>Nunc Dimittis</hi>, of the
ninth century, and is at Oxford, Bodleian, Misc. Gr. 5, ff. 313-4<note place='foot'>These songs, with thirteen others from the Old Testament and Apocrypha,
though <emph>partially</emph> written in uncial letters, are included in a volume of Psalms and
Hymns, whose prevailing character is early cursive.</note>.
O<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>c</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Magnificat</hi> in the Verona Psalter of the sixth century (the
Greek being written in Latin letters), published by Bianchini
(Vindiciae Canon. Script. 1740). O<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>, O<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi>, both contain the
three hymns, O<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi> in the great purple and silver Zurich
Psalter of the seventh century (Tischendorf, Monum. sacra
inedita, tom. iv, 1869)<note place='foot'>From Tischendorf's copy of O<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi> Dr. Caspar René Gregory has gathered readings
in Heb. v. 8-vi. 10, and sent them to Dr. Hort.</note>; O<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> of the ninth century at St. Gall
(Cod. 17), partly written in Greek, partly in Latin. O<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>f</hi>, also of
the ninth century, is described by Tischendorf (N. T., eighth
edition) once as <q>Noroff. Petrop.,</q> once as <q>Mosquensis.</q> O<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>g</hi> (IX)
in the Arsenal Library at Paris (MS. Gr. 2), containing, besides
the Psalms and Canticle of the Old Testament, the <hi rend='italic'>Magnificat</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Benedictus</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Nunc Dimittis</hi>, besides the <hi rend='italic'>Lord's Prayer</hi>, the
<hi rend='italic'>Sanctus</hi> and other such pieces. O<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>h</hi>. Taurinensis Reg. B. vii.
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
30 (viii or ix), 5-¾ × 4, ff. 303 (20)<note place='foot'>I.e., twenty lines on a page, according to the form used in this edition.</note>.  Psalter with Luke i. 46-55;
ii. 29-31. See Gregory, Prolegomena, p. 441.
</p>

<p>
P. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Guelpherbytanus</hi> A, and
Q. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Guelpherbytanus</hi> B.
These are two palimpsests discovered by F. A.
Knittel, Archdeacon of Wolfenbüttel, in the Ducal Library of
that city, which (together with some fragments of Ulphilas'
Gothic version) lie under the more modern writings of Isidore
of Seville. He published the whole in 1762<note place='foot'>They had been previously described in a tract <q>Jac. Frid. Heusinger, de
quatuor Evan. Cod. Graec. quem antiqua manu membrana scriptum Guelferbytana
bibliotheca servat.</q> Guelf. 1752.</note>, so far at least as
he could read them, though Tregelles believed more might be
deciphered, and Tischendorf, with his unconquerable energy,
collating them both in 1854, was able to re-edit them more
accurately, Cod. Q in the third volume (1860) and Cod. P in
the sixth (1869) of his Monumenta sacra inedita. The volume
(called the Codex Carolinus) seems to have been once at Bobbio,
and has been traced from Weissenburg to Mayence and Prague,
till it was bought by a Duke of Brunswick in 1689. Codex P
contains, on forty-three or forty-four leaves, thirty-one fragments
of 518 verses, taken from all the four Evangelists<note place='foot'>Codex P contains Matt. i. 11-21; iii. 13-iv. 19; x. 7-19; x. 42-xi. 11;
xiii. 40-50; xiv. 15-xv. 3; xv. 29-39: Mark i. 1-11; iii. 5-17; xiv. 13-24;
48-61; xv. 12-37; Luke i. 1-13; ii. 9-20; vi. 21-42; vii. 32-viii. 2;
viii. 31-50; ix. 26-36; x. 36-xi. 4; xii. 34-45; xiv. 14-25; xv. 13-xvi. 22;
xviii. 13-39; xx. 21-xxi. 3; xxii. 3-16; xxiii. 20-33; 45-56; xxiv. 1, 14-37;
John i. 29-41; ii. 13-25; xxi. 1-11.</note>; Codex Q,
on thirteen leaves, twelve fragments of 247 verses from SS. Luke
and John<note place='foot'>Codex Q contains Luke iv. 34-v. 4; vi. 10-26; xii. 6-43; xv. 14-31;
xvii. 34-xviii. 15; xviii. 34-xix. 11; xix. 47-xx. 17; xx. 34-xxi. 8; xxii. 27-46;
xxiii. 30-49: John xii. 3-20; xiv. 3-22.</note>; but all can be traced only with great difficulty. A
few portions, once written in vermilion, have quite departed,
but Tischendorf has made material additions to Knittel's labours,
both in extent and accuracy. He assigns P to the sixth, Q to
the fifth century. Both are written in two columns, the
uncials being bold, round or square, those of Q not a little
the smaller. The letters in P, however, are sometimes compressed
at the end of a line. The capitals in P are large and
frequent, and both have the sections without the canons of
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
Eusebius (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>). The table of τίτλοι found in the volume
is written in oblong uncials of a lower date, as Knittel thought,
possibly without good reason. Itacisms, what are termed Alexandrian
forms, and the usual contractions (<hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ΙΣ</hi>, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ΞΣ</hi>, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ΚΣ</hi>, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ΘΣ</hi>,
<hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ΥΣ</hi>, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ΠΗΡ</hi>, <emph>ΠΝΑ</emph>, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ΙΛΗΜ</hi>, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ΑΝΟΣ</hi>, <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ΔΑΔ</hi>, Μ [with symbol above it]) occur in both copies.
Breathings also are seen here and there in Q. From Tischendorf's
beautiful facsimiles of Codd. PQ we observe that while
<hi rend='italic'>delta</hi> is far more elaborate in P than in Q, the precise contrary
is the case with <hi rend='italic'>pi</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Epsilon</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>sigma</hi> in P have strong
points at all the extremities; <hi rend='italic'>nu</hi> in each is of the ancient form
exhibited in Codd. אNR (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>); while in P <hi rend='italic'>alpha</hi> resembles
in shape that of our alphabet in Plate <ref target='Plate_II'>ii</ref>. No. 5, <hi rend='italic'>eta</hi> that in
Plate <ref target='Plate_III'>iii</ref>. No. 7. As regards their text we observe that in the
first hundred verses of St. Luke which are contained in both
copies, wherein P is cited for various readings 216 times,
and Q 182 times, P stands alone fourteen times, Q not once.
P agrees with other manuscripts against AB twenty-one
times, Q nineteen: P agrees with AB united fifty times, Q also
fifty: P sides with B against A twenty-nine times, Q thirty-eight:
but P accords with A against B in 102 places, Q in
seventy-five.
</p>

<p>
R. This letter, like some that precede, has been used to
represent different books by various editors, a practice the inconvenience
of which is very manifest. (1) R of Griesbach and
Scholz is a fragment of one quarto leaf containing John i. 38-50,
at Tübingen, with musical notes, which from its thick vellum, from
the want of the sections and Eusebian canons, and the general
resemblance of its uncials to those of late Service Books,
Tischendorf pronounces to be an Evangelistarium, and puts in its
room (2) in his N. T. of 1849, fourteen leaves of a palimpsest in the
Royal Library of Naples (Borbon. ii. C. 15) of the eighth century,
under a <hi rend='italic'>Typicum</hi> (see Suicer, Thes. Eccles. tom. ii. p. 1335), or
Ritual of the Greek Church, of the fourteenth century. These
are fragments from the first three Evangelists, in oblong uncials,
leaning to the right. Tischendorf, by chemical applications, was
able in 1843 to read one page, in two columns of twenty-five lines
each (Mark xiv. 32-39)<note place='foot'>Published in the Jahrbücher (Vienna) d. Lit. 1847.</note>, and saw the sections in the margin; the
Eusebian canons he thinks have been washed out (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>): but
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
in 1859 he calls this fragment W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>, reserving the letter R for
(3) <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Nitriensis</hi>, Brit. Museum, Additional 17211, the
very important palimpsest containing on forty-eight (53)
leaves about 516 verses of St. Luke in twenty-five fragments<note place='foot'>Codex R contains Luke i. 1-13; i. 69-ii. 4; 16-27; iv. 38-v. 5; v. 25-vi.
8; 18-36, 39; vi. 49-vii. 22; 44, 46, 47; viii. 5-15; viii. 25-ix. 1; ix. 12-43; x.
3-16; xi. 5-27; xii. 4-15; 40-52; xiii. 26-xiv. 1; xiv. 12-xv. 1; xv. 13-xvi. 16;
xvii. 21-xviii. 10; xviii. 22-xx. 20; xx. 33-47; xxi. 12-xxii. 15; 42-56; xxii. 71-xxiii.
11; xxiii. 38-51. A second hand has supplied ch. xv. 19-21.</note>,
under the black, broad Syriac writing, being a treatise of
Severus of Antioch against Johannes Grammaticus, of the
eighth or ninth century. There are two columns of about
twenty-five lines each on a page; for their boldness and simplicity
the letters may be referred to the end of the sixth
century; we have given a facsimile of the manuscript (which
cannot be read in parts but with the utmost difficulty), and
an alphabet collected from it (Nos. <ref target='Plate_II'>5</ref>, <ref target='Plate_VI'>17</ref>). In size and shape
the letters are much like those of Codd. INP, only that they are
somewhat irregular and straggling: the punctuation is effected
by a single point almost level with the top of the letters, as
in Cod. N. The pseudo-Ammonian sections are there without
the Eusebian canons, and the first two leaves are devoted to the
τίτλοι of St. Luke. This most important palimpsest is one of
the 550 manuscripts brought to England, about 1847, from the
Syrian convent of S. Mary Deipara, in the Nitrian Desert, seventy
miles N. W. of Cairo. When examined at the British Museum
by the late Canon Cureton, then one of the Librarians, he
discovered in the same volume, and published in 1851 (with six
pages in facsimile), a palimpsest of 4000 lines of Homer's Iliad
not in the same hand as St. Luke, but quite as ancient. The
fragments of St. Luke were independently transcribed, with most
laudable patience, both by Tregelles in 1854, and by Tischendorf
in 1855, who afterwards re-examined the places wherein he
differed from Tregelles (e.g. chh. viii. 5; xviii. 7, 10), and discovered
by the aid of Dr. Wright a few more fragments of chh.
vi-viii. Tischendorf published an edition of Cod. R in his
<q>Monumenta sacra inedita,</q> vol. ii, with a facsimile: the amended
readings, together with the newly-discovered variations in chh.
vi. 31-36, 39, vii. 44, 46, 47, are inserted in the eighth edition of
his Greek Testament. In this palimpsest as at present bound
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
up in the Museum the fragments of St. Luke end on f. 48,
and the rest of the Greek in the volume is in later, smaller,
sloping uncials, and contains propositions from the tenth and
thirteenth books of Euclid. On the critical character of the
readings of this precious fragment we shall make some comments
below.
</p>

<p>
S. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Vaticanus</hi> 354 contains the four Gospels entire,
and is amongst the earliest dated manuscripts of the Greek
Testament (p. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, note 2). This is a folio of 234 leaves, written in
large oblong or compressed uncials: the Epistle to Carpianus
and Eusebian canons are prefixed, and it contains many later
corrections (e.g. Luke viii. 15) and marginal notes (e.g. Matt.
xxvii. 16, 17). Luke xxii. 43, 44; John v. 4; vii. 53-viii. 11 are
obelized. At the end we read ἐγράφει ἡ τιμία δέλτος αὕτη διὰ
χειρὸς ἐμοῦ Μιχαὴλ μοναχοῦ ἁμαρτωλοῦ μηνὶ μαρτίω α´. ἡμέρα ε´,
ὡρα ϛ´, ἔτους ςυνζ. ινδ. ζ´: i.e. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 949. <q>Codicem bis diligenter
contulimus,</q> says Birch: but collators in his day
(1781-3) seldom noticed orthographical forms or stated where
the readings <emph>agree</emph> with the received text, so that a more
thorough examination was still required. Tregelles only inspected
it, but Tischendorf, when at Rome in 1866, carefully
re-examined it, and has inserted many of its readings in his
eighth edition and its supplementary leaves. He states that
Birch's facsimile (consisting of the obelized John v. 4) is
coarsely executed, while Bianchini's is too elegant; he made
another for himself.
</p>

<p>
T. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Borgianus</hi> I, now in the Propaganda at Rome (<hi rend='italic'>see
below</hi>, <ref target='manuscript-evan-180'>Evan. 180</ref>), contains thirteen or more quarto leaves
of SS. Luke and John, with a Thebaic or Sahidic version
at their side, but on the opposite and left page. Each page
consists of two columns: a single point indicates a break in the
sense, but there are no other divisions. The fragment contains
Luke xxii. 20-xxiii. 20; John vi. 28-67; vii. 6-viii. 31 (179
verses, since John vii. 53-viii. 11 are wanting). The portion
containing St. John, both in Greek and Egyptian, was carefully
edited at Rome in 1789 by A. A. Giorgi, an Augustinian
Eremite; his facsimile, however (ch. vii. 35), seems somewhat
rough, though Tischendorf (who has inspected the codex) says
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
that its uncials look as if written by a Copt, from their resemblance
to Coptic letters<note place='foot'>For the Coptic style of the letters Tischendorf compares a double palimpsest
leaf in the British Museum, containing 1 Kings viii. 58-ix. 1, which he assigns to
the fifth century, although the capital letters stand out a little, and are slightly
larger than the rest (Monum. sacr. ined. vol. ii. Proleg. p. xliv). But both
Dr. Wright and Mr. E. Maunde Thompson, from their great experience in this
style of writing, have come to suspect that it is usually somewhat less ancient
than from other indications might be supposed.</note>: the shapes of <hi rend='italic'>alpha</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>iota</hi> are
specially noticeable. Birch had previously collated the Greek
text. Notwithstanding the occasional presence of the rough
and smooth breathing in this copy (p. <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>)<note place='foot'>Tischendorf found breathings also in the palimpsest Numbers (Monum. sac.
ined. <hi rend='italic'>ubi supra</hi>, p. xxv).</note>, Giorgi refers it to
the fourth century, Tischendorf to the fifth. The Greek
fragment of St. Luke was first collated by Mr. Bradley H.
Alford, and inserted by his brother, Dean Alford, in the fourth
edition of his Greek Testament, vol. i (1859). Dr. Tregelles
had drawn Mr. Alford's attention to it, from a hint thrown out
by Zoega, in p. 184 of his <q>Catalogus codd. Copt. MSS. qui in
Museo Borgiano Velitris adservantur.</q> Romae, 1810.
</p>

<p>
T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>s</hi> or T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>woi</hi> is used by Tischendorf to indicate a few leaves in
Greek and Thebaic, which once belonged to Woide, and were
published with his other Thebaic fragments in Ford's Appendix
to the Codex Alexandrinus, Oxon. 1799. They contain Luke
xii. 15-xiii. 32; John viii. 33-42 (eighty-five verses). From the
second fragment it plainly appears (what the similarity of the
facsimiles had suggested to Tregelles) that T and T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>s</hi> are parts
of the same manuscript, for the page of T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>s</hi> which contains John
viii. 33 in Greek exhibits on its reverse the Thebaic version of
John viii. 23-32, of which T affords us only the Greek text.
This fact was first noted by Tischendorf (N. T. 1859), who adds
that the Coptic scribe blundered much over the Greek: e.g.
βαβουσα Luke xiii. 21; so δεκαι for δεκα και, ver. 16. He
transcribed T and T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>woi</hi> (as well as T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>, T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>c</hi>, T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>, which we proceed
to describe), for publication in the ninth volume of his <q>Monumenta
sacra inedita</q> (1870), but owing to his death they never
appeared. But Bp. Lightfoot gives reasons (<hi rend='italic'>see below</hi>, vol. ii.
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
c. 2) for thinking that this fragment was not originally a portion
of T.
</p>

<p>
T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi> at St. Petersburg much resembles the preceding in the
Coptic-like style of writing, but is not earlier than the sixth
century. It contains on six octavo leaves John i. 25-42; ii. 9-iv.
50, spaces left in the text answering the purpose of stops.
T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi> has a harmony of the Gospels at the foot of the page.
</p>

<p>
T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>c</hi> is a fragment of about twenty-one verses between Matt.
xiv. 19 and xv. 8, also of the sixth century, and at St. Petersburg,
in the collection of Bishop Porphyry. Its text in the
twenty-nine places cited by Tischendorf in his eighth edition
accords with Cod. א twenty-four times, with Cod. B twenty
times, with Codd. C and D sixteen times each, with Cod. 33
nine times. Cod. A is wanting here. Compared with these
primary authorities severally, it agrees with א alone once, with
33 alone twice, with אB united against the rest four times: so
that its critical character is very decided.
</p>

<p>
T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi> is a fragment of a Lectionary, Greek and Sahidic, of
about the seventh century, found by Tischendorf in 1866 among
the Borgian manuscripts at Rome. It contains Matt. xvi.
13-20; Mark i. 3-8, xii. 35-37; John xix. 23-27; xx. 30-31:
twenty-four verses only. This fragment and the next have
been brought into this place, rather than inserted in the list of
Evangelistaria, because they both contained fragments of the
Thebaic version.
</p>

<p>
T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> is a fragment of St. Matthew at Cambridge (Univ. Libr.
Addit. 1875). Dr. Hort communicated its readings to Dr. C. R.
Gregory, for his Prolegomena to the eighth edition of Tischendorf's
N. T. It is <q>a tiny morsel</q> of an uncial Lectionary of
the sixth century, containing only Matt. iii. 13-16, the parallel
column probably in the Thebaic version having perished. It was
brought, among other Coptic fragments, from Upper Egypt by
Mr. Greville Chester. Dr. Hort kindly enables me to add to
his description of T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> (Addenda to Tregelles' N. T. p. 1070) that
this <q>tiny morsel</q> is irregular in shape, frequently less than four
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
inches in width and height, the uncial Greek letters being three-eighths
of an inch high. There seem to have been two columns of
either eight or more probably of twenty-four lines each on a page,
but no Coptic portions survive. <q>If of twenty-four lines the
fragment might belong to the inner column of a bilingual MS.
with the two languages in parallel columns, or to the outer
column of a wholly Greek MS. or of a bilingual MS. with the
section in the two languages consecutively, as in Mr. Horner's
Graeco-Thebaic fragment (Evst. 299: <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref>). In the latter
case it might belong to the inner column of a wholly Greek MS.
or of a bilingual MS. with the section in two consecutive
languages. The size of the letters renders it improbable, however,
that the columns were of eight lines only.</q> (Hort.)
</p>

<p>
T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>f</hi> Horner. See below under Thebaic or Sahidic MSS. at
the end.
</p>

<p>
T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>g</hi> Cairo, Cod. Papadopulus Kerameus [vi or vii], 9-½ x 8-¼, ff. 3
(27), two cols., written in letters like Coptic. Matt. xx. 3-32; xxii.
4-16. Facsimile by the Abbate Cozza-Luzi in <q>N. T. e Cod.
Vat. 1209 nativi textus Graeci primo omnium phototypice
representatum</q>&mdash;Danesio, Rome, 1889. See Gregory, Prolegomena,
p. 450.
</p>

<p>
U. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Nanianus</hi> I, so called from a former possessor, is
now in the Library of St. Mark, Venice (I. viii). It contains
the four Gospels entire, carefully and luxuriously written in two
columns of twenty-one lines each on the quarto page, scarcely
before the tenth century, although the <q>letters are in general
an imitation of those used before the introduction of compressed
uncials; but they do not belong to the age when full
and round writing was customary or natural, so that the stiffness
and want of ease is manifest</q> (Tregelles' Horne, p. 202).
It has <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. τ. τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, with much gold
ornament. Thus while the small ο in l. 1 of our facsimile (No.
<ref target='Plate_IX'>22</ref>) is in the oldest style, the oblong <hi rend='italic'>omicrons</hi> creep in at the
end of lines 2 and 4. Münter sent some extracts from this
copy to Birch, who used them for his edition, and states that
the book contains the Eusebian canons. Accordingly in Mark
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
v. 18, B (in error for H) stands under the proper section <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>μη</hi> (48).
Tischendorf in 1843 and Tregelles in 1846 collated Cod. U
thoroughly and independently, and compared their work at
Leipsic for the purpose of mutual correction.
</p>

<p>
V. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Mosquensis</hi>, of the Holy Synod, is known almost<note place='foot'>I say <emph>almost</emph>, for Bengel's description makes it plain that this is the Moscow
manuscript from which F. C. Gross sent him the extracts that Wetstein copied
and numbered Evan. 87. Bengel, however, states that the cursive portion from
John vii onwards bears the date of 6508 or <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1000. Scholz was the first to
notice this identity (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 250).</note>
exclusively from Matthaei's Greek Testament: he states, no
doubt most truly, that he collated it <q>bis diligentissimè,</q> and
gives a facsimile of it, assigning it to the eighth century. Judging
from Matthaei's plate, it is hard to say why others have dated
it in the ninth. It contained in 1779, when first collated,
the Four Gospels in 8vo with the sections and Eusebian canons,
in uncial letters down to John vii. 39, ουπω γαρ ην, and from
that point in cursive letters of the thirteenth century, Matt. v. 44-vi.
12; ix. 18-x. 1 being lost: when re-collated but four years
later Matt. xxii. 44-xxiii. 35; John xxi. 10-25 had disappeared.
Matthaei tells us that the manuscript is written in a kind of
stichometry by a diligent scribe: its resemblance to Cod. M has
been already mentioned. The cursive portion is Matthaei's V,
Scholz's Evan. 250.
</p>

<p>
W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Reg. Paris</hi> 314 consists of but two leaves at the
end of another book, containing Luke ix. 34-47; x. 12-22
(twenty-three verses). Its date is about the eighth century; the
uncial letters are firmly written, <hi rend='italic'>delta</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>theta</hi> being of the
ordinary oblong shape of that period. Accents and breathings
are usually put; all the stops are expressed by a single point,
whose position makes no difference in its power. This copy
was adapted to Church use, but is not an Evangelistarium,
inasmuch as it exhibits the sections and Eusebian canons<note place='foot'>Notwithstanding, the Eusebian canons have been washed out of W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>, a
strong confirmation of what was conjectured above, p. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>.</note>, and
τίτλοι twice at the head of the page. This fragment was brought
to light by Scholz, and published by Tischendorf, Monumenta
sacra inedita, 1846.
</p>

<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>

<p>
W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>. Tischendorf considers the fragment at Naples he had
formerly numbered R (2) as another portion of the same copy,
and therefore indicates it in his seventh edition of the N. T.
(1859) as W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>. It has seventy-nine leaves, of which the fourteen
last are palimpsest, is written in two columns, with twenty-five
lines in each page; has the Ammonian sections and lections, and
contains Matt. xix. 14-28; xx. 23-xxi. 2; xxvi. 52-xxvii. 1;
Mark xiii. 21-xiv. 67; Luke iii. 1-iv. 20. (Prolegomena to
Tischendorf, p. 395.)
</p>

<p>
W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>c</hi> is assigned by Tischendorf to three leaves containing
Mark ii. 8-16; Luke i. 20-32; 64-79 (thirty-five verses), which
have been washed to make a palimpsest, and the writing erased
in parts by a knife. There are also some traces of a Latin
version, but all these were used up to bind other books in
the library of St. Gall. They are of the eighth century, or the
ninth according to Tischendorf, edd. 7 and 8, and have appeared
in vol. iii of <q>Monumenta sacra inedita,</q> with a facsimile, whose
style closely resembles that of Cod. Δ, and its kindred FG of
St. Paul's Epistles.
</p>

<p>
W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi> was discovered in 1857 by Mr. W. White, sub-librarian of
Trinity College, Cambridge, in the College Library, and was
afterwards observed, and arranged by Mr. H. Bradshaw,
University Librarian, its slips (about twenty-seven in number)
having been worked into the binding of a volume of Gregory
Nazianzen: they are now carefully arranged under glass (B. viii.
5). They comprise portions of four leaves, severally containing
Mark vii. 3-4; 6-8; 30-36; 36-viii. 4; 4-10; 11-16; ix. 2;
7-9, in uncial letters of the ninth century, if not rather earlier,
slightly leaning to the right. The sections are set in the
margin without the Eusebian canons, with a table of harmony
at the foot of each page of twenty-four lines. The τίτλοι are
in red at the top and bottom of the pages, their corresponding
numerals in the margin. The breathings and accents are
often very faint: lessons and musical notes, crosses, &amp;c. are in
red, and sometimes cover the original stops. In text it much
resembles Codd. אBDLΔ: one reading (Mark vii. 33) appears to
be unique. Dr. Scrivener has included it in a volume of fresh
collations of manuscripts and editions which is shortly to appear
under the accomplished editorship of Mr. J. Rendel Harris.
</p>

<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>

<p>
W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> is a fragment containing John iv. 7-14, in three leaves,
found by the Very Rev. G. W. Kitchin, Dean of Winchester, in
Christ Church Library, when Tischendorf was at Oxford in 1865.
It much resembles O at Moscow, and, like it, had a commentary
annexed, to which there are numeral references set before
each verse.
</p>

<p>
W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>f</hi> is a palimpsest fragment of St. Matt. xxv. 31-36, and
vi. 1-18 (containing the doxology in the Lord's Prayer), of about
the ninth century, underlying Wake 13 at Christ Church, Oxford
(Acts 192, Paul. 246), discovered by the late Mr. A. A. Vansittart
(Journal of Philology, vol. ii. no. 4, p. 241, note 1).
</p>

<p>
X. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Monacensis</hi>, in the University Library at Munich
(No. 1/26), is a valuable folio manuscript of the end of the ninth
or early in the tenth century, containing the Four Gospels
(in the order described above, with serious omissions)<note place='foot'>Codex X contains Matt. vi. 6, 10, 11; vii. 1-ix. 20; ix. 34-xi. 24; xii.
9-xvi. 28; xvii. 14-xviii. 25; xix. 22-xxi. 13; 28-xxii. 22; xxiii. 27-xxiv.
2; 23-35; xxv. 1-30; xxvi. 69-xxvii. 12; Mark vi. 47-Luke i. 37; ii. 19-iii.
38; iv. 21-x. 37; xi. 1-xviii. 43; xx. 46-John ii. 22; vii. 1-xiii. 5; xiii.
20-xv. 25; xvi. 23-xxi. 25. The hiatus in John ii. 22-vii. 1 is supplied on
paper in a hand of the twelfth century; Mark xiv. 61-64; xiv. 72-xv. 4; xv. 33-xvi.
6 are illegible in parts, and xvi. 6-8 have perished. Matt. v. 45 survives only
in the commentary.</note>, and
a commentary (chiefly from Chrysostom) surrounding and
interspersed with the text of all but St. Mark, in early cursive
letters, not unlike (in Tischendorf's judgement) the celebrated
Oxford Plato dated 895. The very elegant uncials of Cod. X
<q>are small and upright; though some of them are compressed,
they seem as if they were <emph>partial</emph> imitations of those used in
very early copies</q> (Tregelles' Horne, p. 195). Each page has
two columns of about forty-five lines each. There are no
divisions by κεφάλαια or sections, nor notes to serve for ecclesiastical
use. From a memorandum we find that it came from
Rome to Ingoldstadt, as a present from Gerard Vossius [1577-1649];
from Ingoldstadt it was taken to Landshut in 1803,
thence to Munich in 1827. When it was at Ingoldstadt Griesbach
obtained some extracts from it through Dobrowsky; Scholz
first collated it, but in his usual unhappy way; Tischendorf in
1844, Tregelles in 1846. Dean Burgon examined it in 1872.
</p>

<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>

<p>
Y. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Barberini</hi> 225 at Rome (in the Library founded
by Cardinal Barberini in the seventeenth century) contains on
six large leaves the 137 verses John xvi. 3-xix. 41, of about
the eighth century. Tischendorf obtained access to it in 1843
for a few hours, after some difficulty with the Prince Barberini,
and published it in his first instalment of <q>Monumenta sacra
inedita,</q> 1846. Scholz had first noticed, and loosely collated
it. A later hand has coarsely retraced the letters, but the
ancient writing is plain and good. Accents and breathings are
most often neglected or placed wrongly: κ θ τ [each with a small symbol after and below the character] are frequent
at the end of lines. For punctuation one, two, three or
even four points are employed, the power of the single point
varying as in Codd. E Θ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi> and B of the Apocalypse. The
pseudo-Ammonian sections are without the Eusebian canons:
and such forms as λήμψεται xvi. 14, λήμψεσθε ver. 24 occur.
These few uncial leaves are prefixed to a cursive copy of the
Gospels with Theophylact's commentary (Evan. 392): the text
is mixed, and lies about midway between that of Cod. A and
Cod. B.
</p>

<p>
Z. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Dublinensis rescriptus</hi>, one of the chief palimpsests
extant, contains 295 verses of St. Matthew's Gospel in
twenty-two fragments<note place='foot'>Codex Z contains Matt. i. 17-ii. 6; ii. 13-20; iv. 4-13; v. 45-vi. 15;
vii. 16-viii. 6; x. 40-xi. 18; xii. 43-xiii. 11; 57-xiv. 19; xv. 13-23; xvii.
9-17; 26-xviii. 6; xix. 4-12; 21-28; xx. 7-xxi. 8; 23-30; xxii. 16-25; 37-xxiii.
3; 15-23; xxiv. 15-25; xxv. 1-11; xxvi. 21-29; 62-71.</note>. It is of a small quarto size, originally
10-½ inches by 8, now reduced to 8-¼ inches by 6, once containing
120 leaves arranged in quaternions, of which the first that
remains bears the <emph>signature</emph> 13 (ΙΓ): fourteen sheets or double
leaves and four single leaves being all that survive. It was
discovered in 1787 by Dr. John Barrett, Senior Fellow of Trinity
College, Dublin, under some cursive writing of the tenth century
or later, consisting of Chrysostom de Sacerdotio, extracts from
Epiphanius, &amp;c. In the same volume are portions of Isaiah
(eight leaves) and of Gregory Nazianzen, in erased uncial letters,
the latter not so ancient as the fragment of St. Matthew. All
the thirty-two leaves of this Gospel that remain were engraved
in copper-plate facsimile<note place='foot'>Not in moveable type, as a critic in the <hi rend='italic'>Saturday Review</hi> (Aug. 20, 1881) seems
to suppose.</note> at the expense of Trinity College, and
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
published by Barrett in 1801, furnished with Prolegomena, and
the contents of each facsimile plate in modern Greek characters,
on the opposite page. The facsimiles are not very accurate, and
the form of the letters is stated to be less free and symmetrical
than in the original: yet from these plates (for the want of
a better guide) our alphabet (No. <ref target='Plate_II'>6</ref>) and specimen (No. <ref target='Plate_VII'>18</ref>) have
been taken. The Greek type on the opposite page was not
very well revised, and a comparison with the copper-plate will
occasionally convict it of errors, which have been animadverted
upon more severely than was quite necessary. The Prolegomena
were encumbered with a discussion of our Lord's genealogies
quite foreign to the subject, and the tone of scholarship is not
very high; but Barrett's judgement on the manuscript is correct
in the main, and his conclusion, that it is as old as the sixth
century, has been generally received. Tregelles in 1853 was
permitted to apply a chemical mixture to the vellum, which
was already miserably discoloured, apparently from the purple
dye: he was thus enabled to add a little (about 200 letters)
to what Barrett had read long since<note place='foot'>Mr. E. H. Hansell prints in red these additional readings thus fresh brought
to light in the Appendix to his <q>Texts of the oldest existing manuscripts of the
New Testament,</q> Oxford, 1864.</note>, but he found that in
most places which that editor had left blank, the vellum had
been cut away or lost: it would no doubt have been better
for Barrett to have stated, in each particular case, why he had
been unable to give the text of the passage. A far better
edition of the manuscript, including the fragment of Isaiah,
and a newly-discovered leaf of the Latin Codex Palatinus
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>), with Prolegomena and two plates of real facsimiles, was
published in 1880 by T. K. Abbott, B.D., Professor of Biblical
Greek in the University of Dublin. He has read 400 letters
hitherto deemed illegible, and is inclined to assign the fifth
century as the date of the Codex. Codex Z, like many others,
and for the same orthographical reasons, has been referred to
Alexandria as its native country. It is written with a single
column on each page of twenty-one or twenty-three lines<note place='foot'><q>Barrett's edition shows that of the sixty-four pages of the MS. fifty had
originally twenty-one lines to the page, and fourteen had twenty-three.</q> Dr.
Ezra Abbot.</note>.
The so-named Ammonian sections are given, but not the
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
Eusebian canons: the τίτλοι are written at the top of the pages
by a later hand according to Porter and Abbott, though this
may be questioned (Gebhardt and Harnack's <q>Texte,</q> &amp;c., I. iv.
p. xxiii ff., 1883), their numbers being set in the margin. The
writing is continuous, the <emph>single</emph> point either rarely found or
quite washed out: the abbreviations are very few, and there
are no breathings or accents. Like Cod. B, this manuscript
indicates citations by &gt; in the margin, and it represents N
by &mdash;, but only at the end of a word and line. A space,
proportionate to the occasion, is usually left when there is
a break in the sense, and capitals extend into the margin
when a new section begins. The letters are in a plain,
steady, beautiful hand: they yield in elegance to none, and are
never compressed at the end of a line. The shape of <hi rend='italic'>alpha</hi>
(which varies a good deal), and especially that of <hi rend='italic'>mu</hi>, is very
peculiar: <hi rend='italic'>phi</hi> is inordinately large: <hi rend='italic'>delta</hi> has an upper curve
which is not usual: the same curves appear also in <hi rend='italic'>zeta</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lambda</hi>,
and <hi rend='italic'>chi</hi>. The characters are less in size than in N, about equal
to those in R, much greater than in AB. In regard to the text,
it agrees much with Codd. אBD: with Cod. A it has only
twenty-three verses in common: yet in them A and Z vary
fourteen times. Mr. Abbott adds that while אBZ stand together
ten times against other uncials, BZ are never alone, but אZ
against B often. It is freer than either of them from transcriptural
errors. Codd. אBCZ combine less often than אBDZ. On
examining Cod. Z throughout twenty-six pages, he finds it alone
thirteen times, differing from א thirty times, from B forty-four
times, from Stephen's text ninety-five times. Thus it approaches
nearer to א than to B.
</p>

<p>
Γ. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Tischendorfian.</hi> IV was brought by Tischendorf
from an <q>eastern monastery</q> (he usually describes the locality
of his manuscripts in such like general terms), and was bought
of him for the Bodleian Library (Misc. Gr. 313) in 1855. It
consists of 158 leaves, 12 inches x 9-¼, with one column (of
twenty-four not very straight or regular lines) on a page,
in uncials of the ninth century, leaning slightly back, but
otherwise much resembling Cod. K in style (facsimile No. <ref target='Plate_XII'>35</ref>).
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
St. Luke's Gospel is complete; the last ten leaves are hurt
by damp, though still legible. In St. Mark only 105 verses
are wanting (iii. 35-vi. 20); about 531 verses of the other
Gospels survive<note place='foot'>These are Matt. vi. 16-29; vii. 26-viii. 27; xii. 18-xiv. 15; xx. 25-xxi.
19; xxii. 25-xxiii. 13; John vi. 14-viii. 3; xv. 24-xix. 6.</note>. Tischendorf, and Tregelles by his leave, have
independently collated this copy, of which Tischendorf gives
a facsimile in his <q>Anecdota sacra et profana,</q> 1855. Some of its
peculiar readings are very notable, and few uncials of its date
deserve that more careful study, which it has hardly yet
received. In 1859 Tischendorf, on his return from his third
Eastern journey, took to St. Petersburg ninety-nine additional
leaves of this self-same manuscript, doubtless procured from the
same place as he had obtained the Bodleian portion six years
before (Notitia Cod. Sinait. p. 53). This copy of the Gospels,
though unfortunately in two distant libraries, is now nearly
perfect<note place='foot'>In the St. Petersburg portion are all the rest of St. John, and Matt. i. 1-v.
31; ix. 6-xii. 18; xiv. 15-xx. 25; xxiii. 13-xxviii. 20; or all St. Matthew
except 115 verses.</note>, and at the end of St. John's Gospel, in the more
recently discovered portion, we find an inscription which seems
to fix the date: ετελειωθη ἡ δέλτος αὔτη μηνι νοεμβριω <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>κζ</hi>, ινδ. <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>η</hi>,
ἡμερα <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ε</hi>, ωρα <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>β</hi>. Tischendorf, by the aid of Ant. Pilgrami's
<q>Calendarium chronologum medii potissimum aevi monumentis
accommodatum,</q> Vienn. 1781, pp. vii, 11, 105, states that the
only year between <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 800 and 950, on which the Indiction was
eight, and Nov. 27 fell on a Thursday, was 844<note place='foot'>Dr. Gregory, Tisch. Prolegomena, p. 401, quotes Gardthausen, Griechische
Palaeogr., Lipsiae, 1879, pp. 159, 344, as assigning <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 979 as the date.</note>. In the Oxford
sheets we find tables of κεφάλαια before the Gospels of
SS. Matthew and Luke; the τίτλοι at the heading of the pages;
their numbers <foreign rend='italic'>rubro</foreign> neatly set in the margin; capitals in red at
the commencement of these chapters; the ἀρχαὶ καὶ τέλη of
lections; the sections and Eusebian canons in their usual places,
and some liturgical directions. Over the original breathings and
accents some late scrawler has in many places put others, in
a very careless fashion.
</p>

<p>
Δ. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Sangallensis</hi>, was first inspected by Gerbert
(1773), named by Scholz (N. T. 1830), and made fully known
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
to us by the admirable edition in lithographed facsimile of
every page, by H. Ch. M. Rettig [1799-1836], published at
Zurich, 1836<note place='foot'>The edition was posthumous, and has prefixed to it a touching <q>Life</q> of
two pages in length, by his brother and pupil, dwelling especially on Rettig's
happy change in his later days from rationalism to a higher and spiritual life.</note>, with copious and satisfactory Prolegomena. It
is preserved and was probably transcribed a thousand years since
in the great monastery of St. Gall in the north-east of Switzerland
(Stifts bibliothek, 48). It is rudely written on 197 leaves
of coarse vellum quarto, 8-7/8 inches by 7-1/8 in size, with from twenty
to twenty-six (usually twenty-one) lines on each page, in a very
peculiar hand, with an interlinear Latin version, and contains
the four Gospels complete except John xix. 17-35. Before
St. Matthew's Gospel are placed Prologues, Latin verses, the
Eusebian canons in Roman letters, tables of the κεφάλαια both
in Greek and Latin, &amp;c. Rettig thinks he has traced several
different scribes and inks employed on it, which might happen
easily enough in the Scriptorium of a monastery; but, if so,
their style of writing is very nearly the same, and they doubtless
copied from the same archetype, about the same time. He has
produced more convincing arguments to show that Cod. Δ is
part of the same book as the Codex Boernerianus, G of St. Paul's
Epistles. Not only do they exactly resemble each other in their
whole arrangement and appearance, but marginal notes by the
first hand are found in each, of precisely the same character.
Thus the predestinarian doctrines of the heretic Godeschalk
[d. 866] are pointed out for refutation at the hard texts, Luke
xiii. 24; John xii. 40 in Δ, and six times in G<note place='foot'>Viz. Rom. iii. 5; 1 Cor. ii. 8; 1 Tim. ii. 4; iv. 10; vi. 4; 2 Tim. ii. 15.
Equally strong are the notices of Aganon, who is cited eight times in Δ, about
sixteen in G. This personage was Bishop of Chartres, and a severe disciplinarian,
who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 941; a fact which does not hinder our assigning Cod. Δ to the
ninth century, as Rettig states that all notices of him are by a later hand. There
is the less need of multiplying proofs of this kind, as Tregelles has observed,
a circumstance which demonstrates to a certainty the identity of Cod. Δ and G.
When he was at Dresden he found in Cod. G twelve leaves of later writing in
precisely the same hand as several that are lithographed by Rettig, because they
were attached to Cod. Δ. <q>Thus,</q> he says, <q>these MSS. once formed one book;
and when separated, some of the superfluous leaves with additional writing
attached to the former part, and some to the latter</q> (Tregelles' Horne's Introd.
vol. iv. p. 197).</note>. St. Mark's
Gospel represents a text different from that of the other
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
Evangelists, and the Latin version (which is clearly <foreign rend='italic'>primâ
manu</foreign>) seems a mixture of the Vulgate with the older Italic, so
altered and accommodated to the Greek as to be of little critical
value. The penmen seem to have known but little Greek, and
to have copied from a manuscript written continuously, for the
divisions between the words are sometimes absurdly wrong.
There are scarcely any breathings or accents, except about the
opening of St. Mark, and once an aspirate to ἑπτα; what we do
find are often falsely given; and a dot is set in most places
regularly at the end of every <emph>Greek</emph> word. The letters have
but little tendency to the oblong shape, but <hi rend='italic'>delta</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>theta</hi> are
decidedly of the latest uncial type. Here, as in Paul. Cod. G,
the mark &gt;&gt;&gt; is much used to fill up vacant spaces. The
text from which Δ was copied seems to have been arranged
in στίχοι, for almost every line has at least one Greek capital
letter, grotesquely ornamental in colours<note place='foot'>The portion of this manuscript contained in Paul. G was divided into στίχοι
on the same principle by Hug (Introduction, vol. i. p. 283, Wait's translation).</note>. We transcribe three
lines, taken almost at random, from pp. 80-1 (Matt. xx. 13-15),
in order to explain our meaning:
</p>

<lg>
<l>dixit uni eo<hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>r</hi> amice non <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ij</hi>usto tibi <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>nn</hi>e</l>
<l>ειπεν; μοναδι; αυτων; Εταιρε; ουκ; αδικω; σε; Ουχι</l>
<l>ex denario convenisti mecū tolle tuū et vade</l>
<l>δηναριου συνεφωνησασ; μοι; Αρον; το; σον και υπαγε</l>
<l>volo autē huic novissimo dare sicut et tibi antā non li</l>
<l>Θελω δε τουτω τω εσχατω δουναι ωσ και; σοι; Η; ουκ εξ</l>
</lg>

<p>
It will be observed that, while in Cod. Δ a line begins at any
place, even in the middle of a word; if the capital letters be
assumed to commence the lines, the text divides itself into
regular στίχοι. See above, pp. <ref target='Pg052'>52-54</ref>. Here are also the τίτλοι,
the sections and canons. The letters Ν and ι, Ζ and Ξ, Τ and
Θ, Ρ and the Latin R are perpetually confounded. Facsimiles of
Luke i. 1-9 may be seen in Pal. Soc. xi. 179. As in the kindred
Codd. Augiensis and Boernerianus the Latin f is much like r.
Tregelles has noted ι ascript in Cod. Δ, but this is rare. There
is no question that this document was written by Latin (most
probably by Irish) monks, in the west of Europe, during the
ninth century (or the tenth, Pal. Soc.).  <hi rend='italic'>See below</hi>, Paul. Cod. G.
</p>

<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>

<p>
Θ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Tischendorfian.</hi> I was brought from the East by
Tischendorf in 1845, published by him in his <q>Monumenta sacra
inedita,</q> 1846, with a few supplements in vol. ii of his new
collection (1857), and deposited in the University Library at
Leipsic. It consists of but four leaves (all imperfect) quarto, of
very thin vellum, almost too brittle to be touched, so that each leaf
is kept separately in glass. It contains about forty-two verses;
viz. Matt. xii. 17-19; 23-25; xiii. 46-55 (in mere shreds); xiv.
8-29; xv. 4-14, with the greater κεφάλαια in red; the sections
and Eusebian canons stand in the inner margin. A few breathings
are <foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign>, and many accents by two later correctors.
The stops (which are rather numerous) resemble those of Cod.
Y, only that four points are not found in Θ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>. Tischendorf
places its date towards the end of the seventh century, assigning
Mount Sinai or lower Egypt for its country. The uncials (especially
ΕΘΟΣ) are somewhat oblong, leaning to the right (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi>
p. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref> note), but the writing is elegant and uniform; <hi rend='italic'>delta</hi> keeps
its ancient shape, and the diameter of <hi rend='italic'>theta</hi> does not extend
beyond the curve. In regard to the text, it much resembles
אB, and stands alone with them in ch. xiv. 12 (αὐτόν).
</p>

<p>
Seven other small fragments, of which four and part of another
are from the manuscripts of Bishop Porphyry at St. Petersburg,
were intended to be included in Tischendorf's ninth volume of
<q>Monumenta sacra inedita</q> (1870), but owing to Tischendorf's
death they never appeared. That active critic had brought two
(Θ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>) and part of another (Θ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>c</hi>) from the East, and deposited
them in the Library at St. Petersburg. They are described by
him as follows:
</p>

<p>
Θ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>, six leaves in large 8vo, of the sixth or seventh century,
torn piecemeal for binding and hard to decipher, contains Matt.
xxii. 16-xxiii. 13; Mark iv. 24-35; v. 14-23.
</p>

<p>
Θ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>c</hi>, one folio leaf, of the sixth century, much like Cod. N,
contains Matt. xxi. 19-24. Another leaf contains John xviii.
29-35.
</p>

<p>
Θ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>, half a leaf in two columns, of the seventh or eighth
century, with accents by a later hand, contains Luke xi. 37-41;
42-45.
</p>

<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>

<p>
Θ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi>, containing fragments of Matt. xxvi. 2-4; 7-9: Θ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>f</hi>, of Matt.
xxvi. 59-70; xxvii. 44-56; Mark i. 34-ii. 12 (not continuously
throughout): Θ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>g</hi> of John vi. 13, 14; 22-24; are all of about
the sixth century.
</p>

<p>
Θ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>h</hi>, consisting of three leaves, in Greek and Arabic of the ninth
or tenth centuries, contains imperfect portions of Matt. xiv. 6-13;
xxv. 9-16; 41-xxvi. 1.
</p>

<p>
Λ. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Tischendorfian.</hi> III<note place='foot'>Λ (1) is really an Evangelistary. See Evst. 493.</note>, whose history, so far as we
know it, exactly resembles that of Cod. Γ, and like it is now in
the Bodleian (Auct. T. Infra I. 1). It contains 157 leaves,
written in two columns of twenty-three lines each, in small,
oblong, clumsy, sloping uncials of the eighth or rather of the
ninth century (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, note 1, and facsimile No. <ref target='Plate_XI'>30</ref>). It has the
Gospels of St. Luke and St. John complete, with the subscription
to St. Mark, each Gospel being preceded by tables of κεφάλαια,
with the τίτλοι at the heads of the pages; the numbers of the
κεφάλαια, of the sections, and of the Eusebian canons (these last
<foreign rend='italic'>rubro</foreign>) being set in the margin. There are also scholia interspersed,
of some critical value; a portion being in uncial
characters. This copy also was described (with a facsimile) by
Tischendorf, Anecdota sacra et profana, 1855, and collated by
himself and Tregelles. Its text is said to vary greatly from
that common in the later uncials, and to be very like Scholz's
262 (Paris 53). For ι <hi rend='italic'>ascriptum</hi> see p. <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, note 2.
</p>

<p>
Here again the history of this manuscript curiously coincides
with that of Cod. Γ. In his Notitia Cod. Sinaitici, p. 58,
Tischendorf describes an early cursive copy of St. Matthew and
St. Mark (<emph>the subscription to the latter being wanting</emph>), which
he took to St. Petersburg in 1859, so exactly corresponding in
general appearance with Cod. Λ (although that be written in
uncial characters), as well as in the style and character of the
marginal scholia, which are often in small uncials, that he pronounces
them part of the same codex. Very possibly he <emph>might</emph>
have added that he procured the two from the same source:
at any rate the subscription to St. Matthew at St. Petersburg
precisely resembles the other three subscriptions at Oxford, and
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
those in Paris 53 (Scholz's 262)<note place='foot'>The subscription to St. Matthew stands in <emph>both</emph>: ευανγελιον κατα ματθαιον.
εγραφη και αντεβληθη εκ των [sic] ἱεροσολυμοις παλαιων αντιγραφων; των εν τω ἁγιω ορει
αποκειμενων; εν στιχοις <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>βφιδ</hi>; κεφφ. <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>τνε</hi>. Very similar subscriptions occur in Codd.
20, 215, 300, 376, 428, 573.</note>, with which Tischendorf
had previously compared Cod. Λ (N. T. Proleg. p. clxxvii, seventh
edition). These cursive leaves are preceded by Eusebius' Epistle
to Carpianus, his table of canons, and a table of the κεφάλαια of
St. Matthew. The τίτλοι in uncials head the pages, and their
numbers stand in the margin.
</p>

<p>
From the marginal scholia Tischendorf cites the following
notices of the Jewish Gospel, or that according to the Hebrews,
which certainly have their value as helping to inform us respecting
its nature: Matt. iv. 5 το ιουδαικον ουκ εχει εις την αγιαν πολιν αλλ
εν <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ιλημ</hi>. xvi. 17 Βαριωνα; το ιουδαικον υιε ιωαννου. xviii. 22 το
ιουδαικον εξης εχει μετα το ἑβδομηκοντακις ἑπτα; και γαρ εν τοις προφηταις
μετα το χρισθηναι αυτους εν <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>πνι</hi> ἁγιω εὑρισκετω (<hi rend='italic'>sic</hi>) εν
αυτοις λογος ἁμαρτιας:&mdash;an addition which Jerome (contra Pelag.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>iii</hi>) expressly cites from the Gospel of the Nazarenes. xxvi. 47
το ιουδαικον; και ηρνησατο και ωμοσεν και κατηρασατο. It is plain
that this whole matter requires careful discussion, but at present
it would seem that the first half of Cod. Λ was written in cursive,
the second in uncial letters; if not by the same person, yet on
the same plan and at the same place.
</p>

<p>
Ξ. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Zacynthius</hi> is a palimpsest in the Library of the
British and Foreign Bible Society in London, which, under
a cursive Evangelistarium written on coarse vellum in or about
the thirteenth century, contains large portions (342 verses) of
St. Luke, down to ch. xi. 33<note place='foot'>Cod. Ξ contains Luke i. 1-9; 19-23; 27, 28; 30-32; 36-66; 77-ii. 19;
21, 22; 33-39; iii. 5-8; 11-20; iv. 1, 2; 6-20; 32-43; v. 17-36; vi. 21-vii.
6; 11-37; 39-47; viii. 4-21; 25-35; 43-50; ix. 1-28; 32, 33; 35; 41-x. 18;
21-40; xi. 1, 2; 3, 4; 24-30; 31; 32, 33.</note>, in full well-formed uncials, but
surrounded by and often interwoven with large extracts from
the Fathers, in a hand so cramped and, as regards the round
letters (ΕΘΟΣ), so oblong, that it cannot be earlier than the
eighth century, although some such compressed forms occur in
Cod. P of the sixth (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>). The general absence of accents
and breathings also would favour an earlier date. As the
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
arrangement of the matter makes it certain that the commentary
is contemporaneous, Cod. Ξ must be regarded as the earliest
known, indeed as the only uncial, copy furnished with
a catena. This volume, which once belonged to <q>Il Principe
Comuto, Zante,</q> and is marked as Μνημόσυνον σεβάσματος τοῦ
Ἱππέος Ἀντωνίου Κόμητος 1820, was presented to the Bible
Society in 1821 by General Macaulay, who brought it from Zante.
Mr. Knolleke, one of the Secretaries, seems first to have noticed
the older writing, and on the discovery being communicated to
Tregelles in 1858 by Dr. Paul de Lagarde of Berlin, with
characteristic eagerness that critic examined, deciphered, and
published the Scripture text, together with the Moscow
fragment O, in 1861: he doubted whether the small Patristic
writing could all be read without chemical restoration. Besides
the usual τίτλοι above the text and other notations of sections,
and numbers running up from 1 to 100 which refer to the catena,
this copy is remarkable for possessing also the division into
chapters, hitherto as has been stated deemed unique in Cod. B.
To this notation is commonly prefixed <hi rend='italic'>psi</hi>, formed like a cross,
in the fashion of the eighth century. The ancient volume must
have been a large folio (14 inches by 11), of which eighty-six
leaves and three half-leaves survive: of course very hard to
read. Of the ecclesiastical writers cited by name Chrysostom,
Origen, and Cyril are the best known.  In text it
generally favours the B and א and their company. In the 564
places wherein Tischendorf cites it in his eighth edition, it
supports Cod. L in full three cases out of four, and those the
most characteristic. It stands alone only fourteen times, and with
Cod. L or others against the five great uncials only thirty times.
In regard to these five, Cod. Ξ sides plainly with Cod. B in
preference to Cod. A, following B alone seven times, BL twenty-four
times, but א thirteen times, A fifteen times, C (which is
often defective) five times, D fourteen times, with none of these
unsupported except with א once. Their combinations in agreement
with Ξ are curious and complicated, but lead to the same
result.  This copy is with אB six times, with אBL fifty-five;
with אBC twenty, but with אBD as many as fifty-four times,
with אBCD thirty-eight times; with BCD thrice, with BC six
times, with BD thirteen. It combines with אA ten times, with
AC fifteen, with AD eleven, with אAC sixteen, with ACD twelve,
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
with אAD six, with אACD twelve. Thus Cod. Ξ favours
B against A 226 times, A against B ninety-seven. Combinations
of its readings opposed to both A and B are אC six, אD eight,
CD two, אCD three. In the other passages it favours ABC
against אD eleven times, ABCD against א eight times, אABC
against D eighteen times, אABD against C, or where C is
defective, thirty-nine times, and is expressly cited twenty-seven
times as standing with אABCD against later copies. The
character of the variations of Cod. Ξ from the Received text may
be judged of by the estimate made by some scholar, that forty-seven
of them are transpositions in the order of the words, 201
are substitutions of one word for another, 118 are omissions,
while the additions do not exceed twenty-four (<hi rend='italic'>Christian
Remembrancer</hi>, January, 1862). The cursive Evangelistarium
written over the uncial is noticed below, and bears the
mark 200*.
</p>

<p>
Π. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Petropolitanus</hi> consists of 350 vellum leaves in
small quarto, and contains the Gospels complete except Matt. iii.
12-iv. 18; xix. 12-xx. 3; John viii. 6-39; seventy-seven verses.
A century since it belonged to Parodus, a noble Greek of Smyrna,
and its last possessor was persuaded by Tischendorf, in 1859, to
present it to the Emperor of Russia. Tischendorf states that it
is of the age of the later uncials (meaning the ninth century),
but of higher critical importance than most of them, and much
like Cod. K in its rarer readings. There are many marginal and
other corrections by a later hand, and John v. 4; viii. 3-6 are
obelized. In the table of κεφάλαια before St. Mark, there is a
gap after <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>λϛ</hi>: Mark xvi. 18-20; John xxi. 22-25 are in a later
hand. At the end of St. Mark, the last section inserted is <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>σλδ</hi>
by the side of ἀναστὰς δέ ver. 9, with <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>η</hi> under it for the Eusebian
canon. Tischendorf first used its readings for his Synopsis
Evangelica 1864, then for the eighth edition of his Greek
Testament 1865, &amp;c. This manuscript in the great majority of
instances sides with the later uncials (whether supported by
Cod. A or not) against Codd. אBCD united.
</p>

<p>
Σ. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Rossanensis</hi>, like Cod. N described above, is a manuscript
written on thin vellum leaves stained purple, in silver
letters, the first three lines of each Gospel being in gold. Like
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
Cod. D it probably dates from the sixth century, if not a little
sooner, and is the earliest known copy of Scripture which is
adorned with miniatures in watercolours, seventeen in number,
very interesting and in good preservation. The illustrated
Dioscorides at Vienna bears about the same date. Attention
was called to the book by Cesare Malpica in 1846, but it was not
seen by any one who cared to use it before March, 1879, when
Oscar von Gebhardt of Göttingen and Adolf Harnack of Giessen,
in their search for codices of Hippolytus, of Dionysius of
Alexandria, and of Cyril of Jerusalem, described by Cardinal
Sirlet in 1582, found it in the Archbishop's Library at Rossano,
a small city in Calabria, and published an account of it in 1880
in a sumptuous form, far more satisfactory to the artist than to
the Biblical critic. Their volume is illustrated by two facsimile
leaves, of one of which a reduction may be seen in our Plate xiv,
No. 43. A copy of the manuscripts was published at Leipsic in
1883 with an Introduction by Oscar von Gebhardt, the Text being
edited by Adolf Harnack<note place='foot'>Texte und Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der altchristlichen Literatur,
1. Bd. 4. Hft., 1883, Leipsig. Also see <hi rend='italic'>Church Quarterly</hi>, Jan. 1884. Prof. Sanday in
Studia Biblica, i. p. III. <q>Would delight the heart of the Dean of Chichester.</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Athenaeum</hi>, No. 302, Sept. 19, 1885.</note>. The page we have exhibited gives
the earliest MS. authority, except Φ, for the doxology in the
Lord's Prayer, Matt. vi. 13. The manuscript is in quarto,
13-½ inches high by 10-¼ broad, and now contains only the
Gospels of St. Matthew and St. Mark on 188 leaves of two
columns each, there being twenty lines in each column of very
regular writing, and from nine to twelve letters in each line. It
ends abruptly at Mark xvi. 14, and the last ten leaves have
suffered from damp; otherwise the writing (especially on the
inner or smooth side of the vellum) is in good preservation, and
the colours of the paintings wonderfully fresh. The binding is
of strong black leather, about 200 years old. As in Cod. B, the
sheets are ranged in quinions, the <emph>signatures</emph> in silver by
the original scribe standing at the lower border of each quire on
the right, and the pages being marked in the upper border in
modern black ink. In Cod. Σ there is no separation between
the words, it has no breathings or accents. Capital letters stand
outside the columns, being about twice the size of the rest, and
the smaller letters at the end of lines are not compressed, as we
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
find them even in Cod. P (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> pp. <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>). The letters are
round and square, and, as was abundantly seen above (pp. <ref target='Pg033'>33-40</ref>),
belong to the older type of writing. The punctuation is very
simple: the full stop occurs half up the letter. There are few
erasures, but transcriptural errors are mostly corrected in silver
letters by the original scribe. To St. Matthew's Gospel is prefixed
Eusebius' Epistle to Carpianus and his Tables of Canons,
both imperfect; also lists of the κεφάλαια <foreign rend='italic'>majora</foreign> and τίτλοι in the
upper margins of the several leaves, with a subscription to the
first Gospel (Ευαγγελιον κατα ματθαιον). This supplementary matter
is written somewhat smaller, but (as the editors judge) by the
same hand as the text, although the letters are somewhat more
recent in general appearance, and ι <foreign rend='italic'>ascriptum</foreign> occurs, as it never
does in the body of the manuscript: [symbol] also is only twice abridged
in the text, but often in the smaller writing. In the margin of the
Greek text the Ammonian sections stand in minute characters over
the numbers of the Eusebian canons. The text agrees but slightly
with א or B, and rather with the main body of uncials and cursives,
which it favours in about a proportion of three to one. With the
cognate purple manuscript Cod. N it accords so wonderfully, that
although one of them cannot have been copied directly from the
other, they must have been drawn directly or indirectly from the
same source. Strong proofs of the affinity between N and Σ are
Matt. xix. 7 ἡμῖν added to ἐνετείλατο: xxi. 8 ἐκ (for ἀπό):
Mark vi. 53 ἐκεῖ added to προσω(ο in Σ)ρμισθησαν: vii. 1 οἱ
prefixed to ἐλθόντες: <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> 29 ὁ ἰ<hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>σ</hi>  added to εἶπεν αὐτῇ: viii. 3
ἐγλυθήσονται: <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> 13 καταλιπών for ἀφείς: <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> 18 οὔπω νοεῖτε for
καὶ οὐ μνημονεύετε: ix. 3 λευκᾶναι οὕτως: x. 5 ἐπέτρεψεν for ἔγραψεν:
xiv. 36 πλήν before ἀλλ᾽: xv. 21 omit παράγοντα: in all which
places the two manuscripts are either virtually or entirely
alone. Generally speaking, the Codex Rossanensis follows the
Traditional Text, but not invariably. We find here the usual
itacisms, as ει for ι, αι for ε, η for ει and ι, ου for ω, and vice
versa; even ο for ω, which is rarer in very ancient copies. The
so-called Alexandrian forms ἤλθατε, ἐλθάτω, ἴδαμεν, ἴδαν for verbs,
τρίχαν and νύκταν for nouns, ἐκαθερίσθη, λήμψομαι, δεκατέσσερες,
τεσσεράκοντα, it has in common with all copies approaching it
in age.
</p>

<p>
Υ. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Blenheimius.</hi> Brit. Mus. Additional 31919,
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
formerly Blenheim 3. D. 13, purchased at Puttick's from the
Sunderland sale in April, 1882. Under a Menaeum (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> our
Evst. 282) for the twenty-eight days of February [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1431],
12-7/8 x 8-1/8, containing 108 leaves, Professors T. K. Abbott
and J. P. Mahaffy of Trinity College, Dublin, discovered at
Blenheim in May, 1881, <emph>palimpsest</emph> fragments of the Gospels of
the eighth century, being seventeen passages scattered over
thirty-three of the leaves: viz. Matt. i. 1-14; v. 3-19; xii. 27-41;
xxiii. 5-xxv. 30; 43-xxvi. 26; 50-xxvii. 17. Mark i. 1-42;
ii. 21-v. 1; 29-vi. 22; x. 50-xi. 13. Luke xvi. 21-xvii. 3;
19-37; xix. 15-31. John ii. 18-iii. 5; iv. 23-37; v. 35-vi. 2:
in all 484 verses. In 1883, Dr. Gregory discovered two more
leaves, making thirty-six in all, with a reduction of the passages
to sixteen by filling up an hiatus, and giving a total of 497
verses. It is probable that writing lies under all the 108
leaves. It exhibits <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>) in gold, ἀρχαί and τέλη,
but is very hard to read, and has not yet been collated. Of
less account are palimpsest pieces of the eleventh century on
some of the leaves, containing Matt. xi. 13, &amp;c.; Luke i. 64, &amp;c.;
ii. 25-34, and a later cursive patch (fol. 23) containing
Mark vi. 14-20.
</p>

<p>
Φ. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Beratinus.</hi> This symbol was taken by Herr
Oscar von Gebhardt to denote the imaginary parent of Cursives
13, 69, 124, 346, of which the similarity has been traced by the
late W. H. Ferrar and Dr. T. K. Abbott in <q>A Collection of Four
Important MSS.</q> (1877). But it is now permanently affixed to
an Uncial MS. seen by M. Pierre Batiffol on the instigation of
Prof. Duchesne in 1875 at Berat or Belgrade in Albania. This
manuscript had been previously described by Mgr. Anthymus
Alexoudi, Orthodox Metropolitan of Belgrade, in an account of
his diocese published in 1868 in Corfu. According to M. Batiffol,
it is a purple manuscript, written in silver letters on vellum,
an <foreign rend='italic'>édition de grande luxe</foreign>, and therefore open to the charge
brought by St. Jerome in his Prolegomena to Job against
the great adornment of manuscripts, as being far from constituting
an index of accuracy. It contains 190 unpaged leaves
in quaternions, firmly sewn together, having two columns in
a page of seventeen lines each, and from eight to twelve words
in a line. The leaves are in size about 12-¼ inches by 10-½, and
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
the columns measure 8-¼ inches high by rather more than 4-¼
broad. The pages have the κεφάλαια marked at the top, and the
sections and canons in writing of the eighth century at the side.
The letters are in silver, very regular, and clearly written.
None are in gold, except the title and the first line in St. Mark,
and the words Πατήρ, Ἰησοῦς, and some others in the first six
folios. There is no ornamentation, but the first letters of
paragraphs are twice as large as the other letters. The letters
have no decoration, except a cross in the middle of the initial O's.
The writing is continuous in full line without stichometry.
Quotations from the Old Testament are marked with a kind of
inverted comma. There are no breathings, or accents. Punctuation
is made only with the single comma or double comma,
consisting of a point slightly elongated much like a modern
written comma, and placed at about mid-height, or else with
a vacant space, or by passing to the next line. The apostrophe
is not always used to mark elisions, but is generally put after
Ρ final. Abbreviations are of the most ancient kind. The
character of the letters may be seen in the specimen given above,
No. <ref target='Plate_XIV'>43</ref>. Altogether, the Codex Beratinus (Φ) may probably be
placed at the end of the fifth century, a little before the
Dioscorides (506 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>), and before the Codex Rossanensis.
</p>

<p>
As to the character of the text, it inclines to the large body
of Uncials and Cursives, and is rarely found with Bא and Z of
St. Matthew or Δ of St. Mark. A specimen examination of fifty
passages at the beginning of St. Matthew gives forty-four
instances in which it agrees with the larger body of Uncials and
Cursives, six when it passes over to the other side, whilst in
thirty-eight it agrees with Σ. In the same passages, Σ agrees
thirty-eight times with the larger body, and twelve times with
א or B. Like Σ it contains the doxology in Matt. vi. 13.
</p>

<p>
Codex Φ has gone through many vicissitudes. It has perhaps
been at Patmos, where it may have been mutilated by some
of the Crusaders, and at Antioch. It contains only St. Matthew
and St. Mark; a note says that the disappearance of St. Luke
and St. John is due to the Franks of Champagne. The first six
folios are in a bad state, so that the text as we have it does not
begin till St. Matt. vi. 3 η αριστερα σου κ.τ.λ. Hiatus occurs
Matt. vii. 26-viii. 7, in xviii. 23-xix. 3, and in Mark xiv. 62-fin.
So that Cod. Φ presents no direct evidence&mdash;only the
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
testimony to the general character of its companions derived
from its own character and general coincidence&mdash;upon the last
twelve verses of St. Mark. Part of folio 112, at the end of
St. Matthew, is blank, and folios 113, 114, contain the κεφάλαια
of St. Mark.
</p>

<p>
It was handsomely bound in 1805 in wood covered with
chased silver.
</p>

<p>
Ψ. In the Monastery of Laura at Mount Athos [viii or ix],
8-¼ x 6, ff. 261 (31), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> Mark ix. 5-end;
Luke, John, Acts, 1, 2 Peter, James, 1, 2, 3 John, Romans,
Hebrews viii. 13; ix. 19-end. Inserts the supplement of L to
St. Mark before the last twelve verses, and the lectionary τέλος
after ἐφοβοῦντο γάρ. See Gregory, Prolegomena, p. 445.
</p>

<p>
Ω. In the Monastery of Dionysius at Athos [viii or ix],
8-¾ x 6-½, ff. 289 (22), two columns. Whole four Gospels. Gregory,
p. 446.
</p>

<p>
ב. In the Monastery of St. Andrew at Athos [ix or x],
8 x 6-¼, ff. 152 (37). The four Gospels. Gregory, p. 446.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI. Uncial Manuscripts Of The Acts And Catholic Epistles,
Of St. Paul's Epistles, And Of The Apocalypse.</head>

<div>
<head>I. Manuscripts of the Acts and Catholic Epistles.</head>

<lg>
<l>א. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Sinaiticus.</hi></l>
<l>A. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Alexandrinus.</hi></l>
<l>B. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Vaticanus.</hi></l>
<l>C. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Ephraemi.</hi></l>
<l>D. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Bezae.</hi></l>
</lg>

<p>
E. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Laudianus</hi> 35 is one of the most precious treasures
preserved in the Bodleian at Oxford. It is a Latin-Greek copy,
with two columns on a page, the Latin version holding the post
of honour on the left, and is written in very short στίχοι
consisting of from one to three words each, the Latin words
always standing opposite to the corresponding Greek. This
peculiar arrangement points decisively to the West of Europe
as its country, notwithstanding the abundance of Alexandrian
forms has led some to refer it to Egypt. The very large, bold,
thick, rude uncials, without break in the words and without
accents, lead us up to the end of the sixth century as its date. The
Latin is not of Jerome's or the Vulgate version, but is made to
correspond closely with the Greek, even in its interpolations and
rarest various readings. The contrary supposition that the
Greek portion of this codex <emph>Latinised</emph>, or had been altered to
coincide with the Latin, is inconsistent with the facts of the case.
This manuscript contains only the Acts of the Apostles (from
ch. xxvi. 29 παυλος to ch. xxviii. 26 λέγον being lost), and
exhibits a remarkable modification of the text, of which we
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
shall speak in Chapter <ref target='Chapter_VII'>VII</ref>. That the book was once in Sardinia,
appears from an edict of Flavius Pancratius, συν θεω απο επαρχων
δουξ σαρδινιας, appended (as also is the Apostles' Creed in Latin,
and some other foreign matter) in a later hand: Imperial
governors ruled in that island with the title of <foreign rend='italic'>dux</foreign> from the
reign of Justinian, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 534 to <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 749. It was probably among
the Greek volumes brought into England by the fellow-countryman
of St. Paul, Theodore of Tarsus<note place='foot'>Dean. Gywnn of Raphoe is so good as to remind me that among the other
proper names enumerated by Wetstein and Semler as written on the reverse of the
last leaf of this manuscript, ΘΕΩΔΟΡΟΣ stands by itself in a hand which may
be as old as the seventh century. Common as the name is, the fact is interesting
and suggestive. For the orthography compare κωλονια Acts xvi. 12 in Cod. E.</note>, <q>the grand old man</q> as
he has been called by one of kindred spirit to his own (Dean
Hook, Lives of the Archbishops of Canterbury, vol. i. p. 150),
who came to England as Primate at the age of sixty-six, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 668,
and died in 690. At all events, Mill (N. T. Proleg. §§ 1022-6)<note place='foot'>It is probable that Mill got this from <q>Nouvelles Observations sur le Texte
et les Versions du Nouveau Testament,</q> par R. Simon, Paris, 1695.</note>
has rendered it all but certain, that the Venerable Bede [d. 735]
had this very codex before him when he wrote his <q>Expositio
Retractata</q> of the Acts<note place='foot'>I see no force in Tischendorf's objection, that if Theodore had brought Cod.
E to England, Bede would have used it before he came to write his <q>Expositio
Retractata.</q></note>, and Woide (Notitia Cod. Alex., p. 156,
&amp;c.) has since alleged six additional instances of agreement
between them. The manuscript, however, must have been
complete when Bede used it, for he cites in the Latin ch. xxvii. 5;
xxviii. 2. Tischendorf (Proleg. p. xv) adds ch. xxvii. 1, 7, 14,
15, 16, 17: but these last instances are somewhat uncertain.
This manuscript, with many others, was presented to the
University of Oxford in the year 1636, by its munificent
Chancellor, Archbishop Laud. Thomas Hearne, the celebrated
antiquary, published a full edition of it in 1715, which is now
very scarce, and was long known to be far from accurate.
Sabatier in 1751 gave the Latin of it taken from Hearne.
Tischendorf has published a new edition, from two separate
collations made by himself in 1854 and 1865, in the ninth
volume by way of Appendix to his <q>Monumenta sacra inedita,</q>
1870. It is also found in vol. ii of Hansell's edition of the
Ancient Texts, published at the Clarendon Press in 1864. Cod. E
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
has been stated to have capital letters at the commencement of
each of the Euthalian sections, but as the capitals occur at other
places where the sense is broken but slightly (e.g. ch. xvii. 20),
this circumstance does not prove that those sections were known
to the scribe. It is in size 10-¼ inches by 8-½, and consists of 227
leaves of twenty-three, twenty-four, twenty-five, or twenty-six
lines each; about fifteen leaves are lost: the vellum is rather
coarse in quality, and the ink in many places very faint. There
seem to be no stops nor breathings, except an aspirate over
initial <hi rend='italic'>upsilon</hi> ([symbol] or ὑ, sometimes <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>υ</hi> or υ [with diaresis]) almost invariably. The
shape of <hi rend='italic'>xi</hi> is more complicated than usual (see our facsimile,
No. <ref target='Plate_X'>25</ref>); the other letters (e.g. <hi rend='italic'>delta</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>psi</hi>) are such as were
common in the sixth or early in the seventh century. There
are also many changes by a later uncial hand. Mr. Hansell
(Ancient Texts, Oxford, 1864), as well as Tischendorf, exhibits
one whole page in zinco-photography.
</p>

<p>
F<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Coislin.</hi> I.
</p>

<p>
G. Tischendorf, in his eighth edition of the N. T., assigns
this letter (formerly appropriated to Cod. L) to one octavo leaf
of the seventh century, now at St. Petersburg, written in thick
uncials without accents, torn from the wooden cover of a Syriac
book, and containing Acts ii. 45-iii. 8. It has a few rare and
valuable readings. Dr. Hort (Supplement to Tregelles, p. 1021)
cites it as G<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>.
</p>

<p>
G<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Vaticanus Romanus</hi> 9671 [iv?] fol., ff. 5 (22), palimpsest.
<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Gregory, Prolegomena, p. 414.
</p>

<p>
H. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Mutinensis</hi> [cxcvi], ii. G. 3, of the Acts, in the
Grand Ducal Library at Modena, is an uncial copy of about the
ninth century, defective in Acts i. 1-v. 28; ix. 39-x. 19; xiii.
36-xiv. 3, all supplied by a cursive hand [h], <q>in my judgement
 ... scarcely later</q> (Burgon), and in xxvii. 4-xxviii. 31
(written in uncials of about the eleventh century). The
Epistles are in cursive letters of the twelfth century, indicated
in the Catholic Epistles by h, in the Pauline by 179. Scholz
first collated it loosely, as usual; then Tischendorf in 1843,
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
Tregelles in 1846, afterwards comparing their collations for
mutual correction.
</p>

<p>
I. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Petropolit.</hi> or <hi rend='smallcaps'>Tischendorfian.</hi> II.
</p>

<p>
K. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Mosquensis</hi>, S. Synodi No. 98, is Matthaei's g, and
came from the monastery of St. Dionysius on Mount Athos. It
contains the Catholic Epistles entire, but not the Acts; and the
Pauline Epistles are defective only in Rom. x. 18-1 Cor. vi. 13;
1 Cor. viii. 7-11. Matthaei alone has collated this document,
and judging from his facsimile (Cath. Epp. 1782) it seems to
belong to the ninth century. This copy is Scholz's Act. 102,
Paul. 117. It is not so thoroughly known but that it is often
necessary to cite its readings <foreign rend='italic'>ex silentio</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
L (formerly G). <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Biblioth. Angelicae</hi> A. 2. 15, belonging
to the Augustinian monks at Rome, formerly <q>Cardinalis
Passionei,</q> contains the Acts from ch. viii. 10, μισ του θεου to the
end, the Catholic Epistles complete, and the Pauline down to
Heb. xiii. 10, οὐκ ἔχουσιν, of a date not earlier than the middle of
the ninth century. It was collated in part by Bianchini and
Birch, in full by Scholz (1820, J. Paul) and by F. F. Fleck
(1833). Tischendorf in 1843, Tregelles in 1845, collated it
independently, and subsequently compared their papers, as they
have done in several other instances.
</p>

<p>
M of Gregory (G<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>), fol., ff. 5 (22), palimpsest, containing fragments
of Acts xvi-xviii of the eighth or ninth century, was
published by Cozza (Sacr. Bibl. Vetust. Frag. iii: Rome, 1877).
It was transferred to the Vatican (No. 9671) from the Greek convent
of Grotta Ferrata.
</p>

<p>
P. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Porphyrianus</hi> is a palimpsest containing the Acts,
all the Epistles, the Apocalypse, and a few fragments of 4 Maccabees,
of the ninth century, found by Tischendorf in 1862 at St.
Petersburg in the possession of the Archimandrite (now Bishop)
Porphyry, who allowed him to take it to Leipsic to decipher.
He has published it at length in his <q>Monumenta sacra inedita,</q>
vol. v, vi, whence Tregelles derived its readings for the Pauline
Epistles and the Apocalypse. In the latter book it is especially
useful, and generally confirms Codd. AC, though it is often with
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
Cod. א, sometimes against all the rest. It has the αρ [with χ over them] and τε [with circumflex over them] of
Church lessons in the margin, and is defective (besides a few
words or letters lost here and there) in Acts i. 1-ii. 15;
1 John iii. 20-v. 1; Jude 4-15; Rom. ii. 16-iii. 5; viii. 33-ix.
11; xi. 22-xii. 1; 1 Cor. vii. 16, 17; xii. 23-xiii. 5; xiv.
23-39; 2 Cor. ii. 14, 15; Col. iii. 16-iv. 8; 1 Thess. iii. 5-iv.
17; Apoc. xvi. 13-xvii. 1; xx. 1-9; xxii. 6-21. Moreover
James ii. 12-21; 2 Pet. i. 20-ii. 5 are barely legible. Mr.
Hammond (Outlines of Textual Criticism) has taken from
Tischendorf's fifth volume a neat facsimile of it in Acts iv. 10-15,
comprising uncials of the latest form, leaning to the right, lying
under cursive writing (Heb. vii. 17-25), some four centuries more
recent. Dr. Hort (Supplement to Tregelles, p. xxx) states that
in the Acts the text of Cod. P is almost exclusively of a very
late type, but that it contains a much larger though varying
proportion of various readings elsewhere, except in 1 Peter. The
upper or later writing in this manuscript is, for once, available
for critical purposes, since it consists of fragments of the labours
of Euthalius (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>), and is cited by Tischendorf under the
notation of Euthal.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>cod.</hi>
</p>

<p>
S. From the monastery of Laura at Mount Athos [viii or ix],
11 x 8-½, ff. 120 (30), Acts, Cath. Rom. 1 Cor. i. 1-v. 8; xiii.
8-xvi. 24; 2 Cor. i 1-xi. 23; Eph. iv. 20-vi. 20. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi>
Gregory, p. 447.
</p>

<p>
ב. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2061, formerly Basil 100, before Patiriensis
27 [v], palimpsest, ff. 21 out of 316. Fragments of Acts, Cath.,
and Paul. Came from the monastery of St. Mary of Patirium,
a suburb of Rossana in Calabria. Discovered by M. Pierre
Batiffol, the investigator of Cod. Φ. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Gregory, p. 447.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>II. Manuscripts of the Pauline Epistles.</head>

<lg>
<l>א. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Sinaiticus</hi></l>
<l>A. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Alexandrinus.</hi></l>
<l>B. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Vaticanus.</hi></l>
<l>C. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Ephraemi.</hi></l>
</lg>

<p>
D. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Claromontanus</hi>, No. 107 of the Royal Library at
Paris, is a Greek-Latin copy of St. Paul's Epistles, one of the
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
most ancient and important in existence. Like the Cod.
Ephraemi in the same Library it has been fortunate in such
an editor as Tischendorf, who published it in 1852 with
complete Prolegomena, and a facsimile traced by Tregelles.
This noble volume is in small quarto, written on 533 leaves
of the thinnest and finest vellum: indeed its extraordinary
delicacy has caused the writing at the back of every page to be
rather too visible on the other side. The words, both Greek
and Latin, are written continuously (except the Latin titles and
subscriptions), but in a stichometrical form (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>): the Greek,
as in Cod. Bezae, stands on the left or first page of the opened
book, not on the right, as in the Cod. Laudianus. Each page has
but one column of about twenty-one lines, so that in this copy, as
in the Codex Bezae, the Greek and Latin are in parallel lines, but
on separate pages. The ink is dark and clear, and otherwise the
book is in good condition. It contains all St. Paul's Epistles
(the Hebrews after Philemon), except Rom. i. 1-7; 27-30, both
Greek and Latin: Rom. i. 24-27 in the Latin is supplied in
a later but very old hand, as also are Rom. i. 27-30 and 1 Cor.
xiv. 13-22 in the Greek: the Latin of 1 Cor. xiv. 8-18; Heb.
xiii. 21-23 is lost. The Epistle to the Hebrews has been
erroneously imputed by some to a later scribe, inasmuch as it is
not included in the list of the sacred books and in the number
of their στίχοι or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>versus</foreign>, which stand immediately <emph>before</emph> the
Hebrews in this codex<note place='foot'>The names and order of the books of the New Testament in this most curious
and venerable list stand thus: Matthew, John, Mark, Luke, Romans, 1, 2
Corinth., Galat., Ephes., 1, 2 Tim., Tit., Colos., <hi rend='italic'>Filimon</hi>, 1, 2 Pet., James, 1, 2,
3 John, Jude, Barnabas' Ep., John's Revelation, Act. Apost., Pastor [Hermas],
Actus Paul., Revelatio Petri.</note>: but the same list overlooks the Epistle
to the Philippians, which has never been doubted to be St.
Paul's: in this manuscript, however, the Epistle to the Colossians
precedes that to the Philippians. Our earliest notice of it is
derived from the Preface to Beza's third edition of the N. T.
(Feb. 20, 1582): he there describes it as of equal antiquity with
his copy of the Gospels (D), and states that it had been found
<q>in Claromontano apud Bellovacos coenobio,</q> at Clermont near
Beauvais. Although Beza sometimes through inadvertence calls
his codex of the Gospels Claromontanus, there seems no reason
for disputing with Wetstein the correctness of his account (see
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
p. <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, note 2), though it throws no light on the manuscript's
early history. From Beza it passed into the possession of Claude
Dupuy, Councillor of Paris, probably on Beza's death [1605]:
thence to his sons Jacques and Pierre Dupuy: before the death
of Jacques (who was the King's Librarian) in 1656, it had been
bought by Louis XIV for the Royal Library at Paris. In
1707, John Aymont, an apostate priest, stole thirty-five leaves;
one, which he disposed of in Holland, was restored in 1720 by
its possessor Stosch; the rest were sold to that great collector,
Harley, Earl of Oxford, but sent back in 1729 by his son, who
had learnt their shameful story. Beza made some, but not
a considerable, use of this document; it was amongst the
authorities consulted for Walton's Polyglott; Wetstein collated
it twice in early life (1715-16); Tregelles examined it in 1849,
and compared his results with the then unpublished transcript
of Tischendorf, which proved on its appearance (1852) the most
difficult, as well as one of the most important, of his critical
works; so hard it had been found at times to determine satisfactorily
the original readings of a manuscript which had been
corrected by <emph>nine</emph> different hands, ancient and modern. The
date of the codex is doubtless the sixth century, in the middle
or towards the end of it. The Latin letters, especially <hi rend='italic'>d</hi>, are the
latest in form (facsimile No. <ref target='Plate_XIV'>41</ref>, 1 Cor. xiii. 5-8), and are much
like those in the Cod. Bezae (No. <ref target='Plate_XIV'>42</ref>), which in many points
Cod. Claromontanus strongly resembles. Leaves 162, 163 are
palimpsest, and contain part of the Phaethon, a lost play of
Euripides. We have already noticed many of its peculiarities
(pp. <ref target='Pg033'>33-40</ref>), and need not here repeat them. <hi rend='italic'>Delta</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>pi</hi>
look more ancient even than in Cod. A: the uncials are simple,
square, regular and beautiful, of about the size of those
in Codd. CD, and larger than in Cod. B. The stichometry
forbids our assigning it to a period earlier than the end of
the fifth century while other circumstances connected with
the Latin version tend to put it a little lower still. The
apostrophus is frequent, but there are few stops or abridgements;
no breathings or accents are <foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign>. Initial
letters, placed at the beginning of books or sections, are plain,
and not much larger than the rest. The comparative correctness
of the Greek text, and its Alexandrian forms, have caused certain
critics to refer us as usual to Egypt for its country: the Latin
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
text is more faulty, and shows comparative ignorance of the
language: yet of what use a Latin version could be except in
Africa or western Europe it were hard to imagine. This Latin
is more independent of the Greek, and less altered from it than
in Codd. Bezae or Laudian., wherein it has little critical value:
that of Cod. Claromont. better represents the African type of
the Old Latin. Of the corrections, a few were made by the
original scribe when revising; a hand of the seventh century
went through the whole (D**); two others follow; then
in sharp black uncials of the ninth or tenth century another
made more than two thousand critical changes in the text,
and added stops and all the breathings and accents (D***);
another D**** (among other changes) added to the Latin subscriptions.
D<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi> supplied Rom. i. 27-30 very early; D<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>c</hi>, a later
hand, 1 Cor. xiv. 13-22. Tischendorf distinguishes several others
besides these.
</p>

<p>
E. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Sangermanensis</hi> is another Greek-Latin manuscript
and takes its name from the Abbey of St. Germain des Prez near
Paris. Towards the end of the last century the Abbey (which at
the Revolution had been turned into a saltpetre manufactory) was
burnt down, and many of its books were lost. In 1805 Matthaei
found this copy, as might almost have been anticipated, at
St. Petersburg, where it is now deposited. The volume is a large
quarto, the Latin and Greek in parallel columns on the same page,
the Greek standing on the left; its uncials are coarse, large, and
thick, not unlike those in Cod. E of the Acts, but of later shape,
with breathings and accents <foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign>, of about the tenth, or
late in the ninth, century<note place='foot'>Facsimiles of this manuscript are given by Semler in his edition of
Wetstein's Prolegomena (1764, Nos. 8, 9). Bianchini's estimate of its age
(Evangeliarium Quadruples, tom. ii. fol. 591, 2), as of the seventh century, is
certainly too high.</note>. It was used for the Oxford New
Testament of 1675: Mill obtained some extracts from it, and
noted its obvious connexion with Cod. Claromontanus: Wetstein
thoroughly collated it; and not only he but Sabatier and
Griesbach perceived that it was, at least in the Greek, nothing
better than a mere transcript of Cod. Claromontanus, made by
some ignorant person later than the corrector indicated by D****.
Muralt's endeavours to shake this conclusion have not satisfied
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
better judges; indeed the facts are too numerous and too plain to
be resisted. Thus, while in Rom. iv. 25 Cod. D reads δικαιωσιν
(accentuated δικαίωσιν by D***), in which D*** changes ν into
νην, the writer of Cod. E adopts δικαίωσινην with its monstrous
accent: in 1 Cor. xv. 5 Cod. D reads μετα ταυτα τοις ενδεκα, D***
εἶτα τοῖς δώδεκα (again observe the accents), out of which Cod. E
makes up μετα ταυεἶτα τοῖς δώενδεκα. In Gal. iv. 31 Cod. D has
διο, which is changed by D*** into ἆρα: Cod. E mixes up the
two into διἆραο. Compare Tischendorf's notes on Eph. ii. 19;
Heb. x. 17, 33, and Dr. Hort's longer specimen, Rom. xv. 31-3
(Introd. p. 254). The Latin version also is borrowed from Cod. D,
but is more mixed, and may be of some critical use: the Greek
is manifestly worthless, and should long since have been removed
from the list of authorities. This copy is defective, Rom. viii.
21-33; ix. 15-25; 1 Tim. i. 1-vi. 15; Heb. xii. 8-xiii. 25.
</p>

<p>
F<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Coislin.</hi> I.
</p>

<p>
F. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Augiensis</hi> in the Library of Trinity College, Cambridge
(B. xvii. 1), is another Greek-Latin manuscript on 136
leaves of good vellum 4to (the <emph>signatures</emph> proving that seven
more are lost, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>), 9 inches by 7-¼, with the two languages
in parallel columns of twenty-eight lines on each page, the Greek
being always inside, the Latin next the edge of the book. It is
called from the monastery of Augia Dives or Major (Reichenau,
or <emph>rich meadow</emph>), on a fertile island in the lower part of Lake
Constance, to which it long appertained, and where it may even
have been written, a thousand years since. By notices at the
beginning and end we can trace it through the hands of G. M.
Wepfer of Schaffhausen and of L. Ch. Mieg, who covered many
of its pages with Latin notes wretchedly scrawled, but allowed
Wetstein to examine it. In 1718 Bentley was induced by
Wetstein to buy it at Heidelberg for 250 Dutch florins, and
both he and Wetstein collated the Greek portion, the latter
carelessly, but Bentley somewhat more fully in the margin of
a Greek Testament (Oxon. 1675) still preserved in Trinity
College (B. xvii. 8). Tischendorf in 1842, Tregelles in 1845,
re-examined the book (which had been placed where it now is
on the death of Bentley's nephew in 1787), and drew attention
to the Latin version: in 1859 Scrivener published an edition of
the Codex in common type, with Prolegomena and a photograph
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
of one page (1 Tim. iii. 14-iv. 5)<note place='foot'>Facsimile of 1 Tim. vi. 19-2 Tim. i. 5 is given in Pal. Soc. Pt. ix (1879), Pl. 127.</note>.  The Epistles of St. Paul
are defective in Rom. i. 1-iii. 19; and the Greek only in 1 Cor.
iii. 8-16; vi. 7-14; Col. ii. 1-8; Philem. 21-25; in which four
places the Latin stands in its own column with no Greek over
against it. In the Epistle to the Hebrews, the Greek being
quite lost, the Latin occupies both columns: this Epistle alone
has an Argument, almost verbatim the same as we read in the
great Cod. Amiatinus of the Vulgate. At the end of the Epistle,
and on the same page (fol. 139, <foreign rend='italic'>verso</foreign>), commences a kind of
Postscript (having little connexion with the sacred text), the
larger portion of which is met with under the title of Dicta
Abbatis Pinophi, in the works of Rabanus Maurus, Archbishop
of Mayence, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 856; from which circumstance
the Cod. Augiensis has been referred to the ninth century.
Palaeographical arguments also would lead us to the same
conclusion. The Latin version (a modification of the Vulgate
in its purest form, though somewhat tampered with in parts to
make it suit the Greek text<note place='foot'>So 1 Cor. xii. 2. For ἄφωνα, Vulg. <hi rend='italic'>muta</hi>, Cod. Aug. ἄμορφα. Rom. viii. 26.
For ἀσθενείαις, Vulg. <hi rend='italic'>infirmitatem orationis nostrae</hi>, Cod. Aug. τῆς δεήσεως, cf. 1 Cor.
vii. 11. Infinitives for Imperatives.</note>) is written in the cursive minuscule
character common in the age of Charlemagne. The Greek
must have been taken from an archetype with the words continuously
written; for not only are they miserably ill divided
by the unlearned German<note place='foot'>He betrays his nationality by placing <q>waltet</q> <foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign> over the first
εξουσειαζει, 1 Cor. vii. 4.</note> scribe, but his design (not always
acted upon) was to put a single middle point at the end of each
word. The Latin is exquisitely written, the Greek uncials are
neat, but evidently the work of an unpractised hand, which
soon changes from weariness. The shapes of <hi rend='italic'>eta</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>theta</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pi</hi>, and
other testing letters are such as we might have expected from
the date; some others have an older look.  Contrary to the
more ancient custom, capitals, small but numerous, occur in the
<hi rend='italic'>middle</hi> of the lines in both languages. Of the ordinary breathings<note place='foot'>In 1 Tim. iv. 2 the Latin h is inserted <foreign rend='italic'>secundâ manu</foreign> before υποκρισι.</note>
and accents there are no traces.  Here and there we meet
with a straight line, inclined between the horizontal and the
acute accent, placed over an initial vowel, usually when it
should be aspirated, but not always (e.g. ίδιον 1 Cor. vi. 18).
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
Over ι and υ double or single points, or a comma, are frequently
placed, especially if they begin a syllable; and occasionally
a large comma or kind of circumflex over ι, ει, and some other
vowels and diphthongs. The arrangement of the Greek forbids
punctuation there; in the Latin we find the single middle point
as a colon or after an abridgement, the semicolon (;) sometimes,
the note of interrogation (?) when needed. Besides the universal
forms of abridgement (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>), [symbol] and [symbol] are frequent in the
Greek, but no others: in the Latin the abbreviations are
numerous, and some of them unusual: Scrivener (Cod. Augiensis
Proleg. pp. xxxi-ii) has drawn up a list of them. This copy
abounds as much as any with real variations from the common
text, and with numberless errors of the pen, itacisms of vowels,
and permutations of consonants. It exhibits many corrections,
a few <foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign>, some unfortunately very recent, but by far
the greater number in a hand almost contemporary with the
manuscript, which has also inserted over the Greek, in 106 places,
Latin renderings differing from those in the parallel column, but
which in eighty-six of these 106 instances agree with the Latin
of the sister manuscript.
</p>

<p>
G. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Boernerianus</hi>, so called from a former possessor, but
now in the Royal Library at Dresden. In the sixteenth century
it belonged to Paul Junius of Leyden: it was bought dear at the
book-sale of Peter Francius, Professor at Amsterdam, in 1705,
by C. F. Boerner, a Professor at Leipsic, who lent it to Kuster
to enrich his edition of Mill (1710), and subsequently to Bentley.
The latter so earnestly wished to purchase it as a companion to
Cod. F, that though he received it in 1719, it could not be
recovered from him for five years, during which he was constantly
offering high sums for it<note place='foot'>Boerner's son tells the tale thirty years afterwards with amusing querulousness
in his Catalogus Bibl. Boern. Lips. 1754, p. 6, cited by Matthaei Cod. Boern.
p. xviii. But there must have been some misunderstanding on both sides, for
it appears from a manuscript note in his copy of the Oxford N. T. of 1675 (Trin.
Coll. B. xvii. 8), that Bentley considered Cod. G his own property; since after
describing Cod. F before the Epistle to the Romans as his own, and as commencing
at Rom. iii. 19, he adds <q>Variae lectiones ex altero <emph>nostro</emph> MSto, ejusdem
veteris exemplaris apographo.</q></note>: a copy, but not in Bentley's hand, had
been already made (Trin. Coll. B. xvii. 2). Cod. G was published
in full by Matthaei in 1791, in common type, with two facsimile
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
pages (1 Cor. ii. 9-iii. 3; 1 Tim. i. 1-10), and his edition is
believed to be very accurate; Anger, Tischendorf, Tregelles,
Böttiger and others who have examined it have only expressly
indicated three errors<note place='foot'>viz. ημας for υμας, Rom. xvi. 17; μετρους for μερους, Eph. iv. 16; εσκοτισμενος
for -μενοι, iv. 18. Add to these στωμα for σωμα, 1 Cor. ix, 27, as cited by Bentley
(Ellis, Critica Sacra, p. 36).</note>. Rettig has abundantly proved that, as
it is exactly of the same size, so it once formed part of the same
volume with Cod. Δ (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref> and note): they must date towards
the end of the ninth century, and may very possibly have been
written in the monastery of St. Gall (where Δ still remains) by
some of the Irish monks who flocked to those parts. That Cod.
G has been in such hands appears from some very curious Irish
lines at the foot of one of Matthaei's plates (fol. 23), which, after
having long perplexed learned men, have at length been translated
for Dr. Reeves, the eminent Celtic scholar<note place='foot'><p>By John O'Donovan, Editor of Irish Annals. I have been favoured with
corrections by the late Dr. Todd, of Trinity College, Dublin, and recently by the
Rev. Robert King of Ballymena, whose version I have ventured to adopt.
</p>
<p>
Téicht do róim [téicht do róim]: To come to Rome, to come to Rome,<lb/>
Mór saido becic torbai: Much of trouble, little of profit,<lb/>
Inrí chondaigi hifoss: The thing thou seekest here,<lb/>
Manimbera latt ni fog bai: If thou bring not with thee, thou findest not.
</p>
<p>
Mór báis mór baile: Great folly, great madness,<lb/>
Mór coll ceille mór mire: Great ruin of sense, great insanity,<lb/>
Olais airchenn teicht dóecaib: Since thou hast set out for death,<lb/>
Beith fó étoil maic Maire.: That thou shouldest be in disobedience to the Son of Mary.
</p>
<p>
The second stanza intimates that as the pilgrimage to Rome is at the risk of
life, it is folly not to be at peace with Christ before we set out. The opening
words <q>To come to Rome</q> imply that the verses were written there by some
disappointed pilgrim. Since the handwriting resembles that of the interlinear
Latin, Mr. King suggests that both may have been the work of the Scottish
Bishop Marcus, or of his nephew Moengal (Rettig, Cod. Δ, Prolegomena, p. xx),
who called at St. Gall on their return from Rome, whence Marcus went homewards,
leaving his books and Moengal behind him.</p></note>. All that we have
said respecting the form of Cod. Δ applies to this portion of it:
the Latin version (a specimen of the Old Latin, but as in Codd.
Bezae and Laudianus much changed to suit the Greek) is cursive
and interlinear; the Greek uncials coarse and peculiar; the
punctuation chiefly a stop at the end of the words, which have
no breathings nor accents. Its affinity to the Cod. Augiensis has
no parallel in this branch of literature. Scrivener has noted all
the differences between them at the foot of each page in his
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
edition of Cod. F: they amount to but 1,982 places, whereof 578
are mere blunders of the scribe, 967 changes of vowels or itacisms,
166 interchanges of consonants, seventy-one grammatical or orthographical
forms; the remaining 200 are real various readings,
thirty-two of them relating to the article. While in Cod. F
(whose first seven leaves are lost) the text commences at Rom.
iii. 19, μω; λεγει, this portion is found complete in Cod. G, except
Rom. i. 1-5; ii. 16-25. All the other lacunae of Cod. F occur
also in Cod. G, which ends at Philem. 20 ἐν <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>χρω</hi>: there is no
Latin version to supply these gaps in Cod. G, but a blank space
is always left, sufficient to contain what is missing. At the end
of Philemon G writes (ad) Προς (laudicenses) λαουδακησασ<note place='foot'>Here αου standing to represent <hi rend='italic'>au</hi> shows that the Greek is derived from the
Latin, not <hi rend='italic'>vice versâ</hi>.</note> (incipit) αρχεται (epistola) επιστολη, but
neither that writing nor the Epistle to the Hebrews follows. It
seems tolerably plain that one of these manuscripts was not
copied immediately from the other, for while they often accord
even in the strangest errors of the pen that men unskilled in
Greek could fall into, their division of the Greek words, though
equally false and absurd, is often quite different: it results
therefore that they are independent transcripts of the same
venerable archetype (probably stichometrical and some centuries
older than themselves) which was written without any
division between the words<note place='foot'>That Cod. G cannot have been taken from Cod. G appears both from matters
connected with their respective Latin versions, and because F contains no trace
of the vacant lines left in G at the end of Rom. xiv to receive ch. xvi. 25-27.
But Dr. Hort (Journal of Philology, vol. iii. No. 5, pp. 67, 68 note) has come
to think that F is a mere transcript of G, the scribe of the former being by far
the more ignorant of the two. He meets our argument to the contrary stated
above in the text, by alleging that in respect to the division of words F is free
from no outrageous portent found in G, while it has to answer for many of its
own. But (to take our examples from one open leaf) if the writer of F were so
helplessly ignorant as Dr. Hort represents, how could he have set right G's
error in 1 Tim. iv. 7, reading και · γραωδεις for G's και αιγραωδεις? Again, if F had
before him an undivided manuscript, one can easily account for such monsters
as in 1 Tim. iv. 2 και · καυτη ριασ μενων· F (<hi rend='italic'>photographed page</hi>), but no one could
possibly have so written with G's κεκαυτηριασμενων before him. That the two
copies were compared together in after times seems evident from the fact stated
in p. 179, that Latin renderings from G stand in eighty-six places above the
Greek of F. It was at the same time perhaps that some ill-divided words in F
were corrected by means of a loop from the Greek of G: e.g. 2 Cor. i. 3 οικτιρμων
G, οικ [symbol] τιρμων F; ii. 14 θριαμβευοντι G, θριαμ [symbol] βεὐοντι F; iv. 9 ενκαταλιμπαννομενοι
G, εν · καταλιμπαν [symbol] νομενοι F; ver. 15 πλεονασασα G, πλεονα [symbol] σασα F. 'Mr. Hort's
view, that F was copied directly from G' (writes Bishop Lightfoot very gently,
Journal of Philology, vol. iii. No. 6, p. 210, note), <q>deserves consideration, and
may prove true, though his arguments do not seem quite conclusive.</q> Lightfoot
elsewhere pronounces that <q>the divergent phenomena of the two Latin texts</q>
seem unfavourable to Dr. Hort's hypothesis (Ep. to Coloss. p. 355, note 2). But
the latter still adheres to it with characteristic firmness: <q>we believe F to be as
certainly in its Greek text a transcript of G [as E is of D]; if not, it is an inferior
copy of the same immediate exemplar</q> (Introd. p. 150). Yet why <q>inferior</q>?</note>. From the form of the letters
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
and other circumstances Cod. F may be deemed somewhat but
not much the older; its corrector <foreign rend='italic'>secundâ manu</foreign> evidently had
both the Greek and the Latin of Cod. G before him, and Rabanus,
in whose works the Dicta Pinophi are preserved (p. 178), was
the great antagonist of Godeschalk, on whom the annotator of
Codd. ΔG bears so hard. Cod. G is in 4to, of ninety-nine leaves,
with twenty-one lines in each. The line indicating breathing (if
such be its use, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>) and the mark &gt; employed to fill up
spaces (p. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>), more frequent in it than in F.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Since Dr. Scrivener wrote the above, a very valuable little
treatise&mdash;a <q>specimen primum</q>&mdash;has been given to the learned
world by Herr P. Corssen<note place='foot'>Epistularum Paulinarum codd. Gr. et Lat. scriptas Augiensem Boernerianum
Claromontanum examinavit, &amp;c. Petrus Corssen, H. Fienche Kiliensis, 1889.</note>, and a most clear and carefully
argued paper has been sent to the editor by the Rev. Nicholas
Pocock of Clifton. Both Herr Corssen and Mr. Pocock agree in
showing that F was not derived from G, nor G from F, but that
they come from the same original. Both agree, again, that the
Greek version is derived, at least in large measure, from the
Latin, as in such instances as the following, which are supplied
by Mr. Pocock, who holds, and appears to prove, that F and
G were copied from an interlinear manuscript: <foreign rend='italic'>ut sciatis</foreign>, ινα
οιδαται (F, G), 1 Thess. iii. 3; <foreign rend='italic'>sicut cancer ut serpat</foreign>, ως γαγγρα,
ινα νομηνεξει (G), 2 Tim. ii. 17, F having the same reading, only
dividing the last word; Gal. iv. 3 <foreign rend='italic'>eramus autem servientes</foreign>, ημεθα
δε δουλωμενοι (F, G). Herr Corssen considers that a Latin was
the scribe of the original, that it was written in Italy, and that
it was better than the Claromontanus (D), to which it had
affinities, this last having an amended text with corrections from
the Greek. The original of all three he supposes to date from
not before the fifth century. But in some of these last suppositions
we are getting upon the ocean of conjecture.
</p>

<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>

<p>
H. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Coislin.</hi> 202 is a very precious fragment, of which
twelve leaves are in the Imperial Library at Paris; nine are
in the monastery or laura of St. Athanasius at Mount Athos,
and have been edited by M. Duchesne in the <q>Archives des
missions scientifiques et littéraires</q> (1876); two more are at
Moscow, and have been described by Matthaei (D. Pauli Epp. ad
Hebr. et Col. Riga, 1784, p. 58); some others are in the Antonian
Library of St. Petersburg (three); some more in the Imperial
Library as described by Muralt (two), or in that of Bishop
Porphyry (one), or at Turin (two). The leaves at Paris contain
1 Cor. x. 22-29; xi. 9-16; 1 Tim. iii. 7-13; Tit. i. 1-3; 15-ii.
5; iii. 13-15; Heb. ii. 11-16; iii. 13-18; iv. 12-15. At Mount
Athos are 2 Cor. x. 18-xi. 6; xi. 12-xii. 2; Gal. i. 1-4; ii.
4-17; iv. 30-v. 5. At Moscow, Heb. x. 1-7; 32-38. At
St. Petersburg, 2 Cor. iv. 2-7; 1 Thess. ii. 9-13; iv. 5-11 (Antonian);
Gal. i. 4-10; ii. 9-14 (Imperial).  In the Library of
Bishop Porphyry, Col. iii. 4-11; and at Turin, 1 Tim. vi. 9-13;
2 Tim. ii. 1-9. They are in quarto, with large square uncials of
about sixteen lines on a page, and date from the sixth century.
Breathings and accents are added by a later hand, which
retouched this copy (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Silvestre, Paléographie Universelle,
Nos. 63, 64). These leaves, which comprise one of our best
authorities for stichometrical writing, were used in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1218
to bind some other manuscripts on Mount Athos, and thence
came into the library of Coislin, Bishop of Metz. Montfaucon
has published Cod. H in his <q>Bibliotheca Coisliniana,</q> but
Tischendorf, who transcribed it, projected a fuller and more
accurate edition. He observed at Paris in 1865 an additional
passage, 2 Cor. iv. 4-6 (Monum. sacr. ined. vol. ix. p. xiv, note),
and cites Cod. H in his eighth edition on 1 Tim. vi. 19; Heb. x.
1-6; 34-38. The subscriptions, which appear due to Euthalius
of Sulci<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> p. <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, note 1.</note>, written in vermilion, are not retouched, and consequently
have neither breathings nor accents. Besides arguments
to the Epistles, we copy the following final subscription from
Tischendorf (N. T. 1859, p. clxxxix): ἔγραψα καὶ ἐξεθέμην κατὰ
δύναμιν στειχηρὸν; τόδε τὸ τεύχος παύλου τοῦ ἀποστόλου πρὸς
ἐγγραμμὸν καὶ εὐκατάλημπτον ἀνάγνωσιν. τῶν καθ᾽ ἡμας ἀδελφῶν;
παρῶν ἀπάντων τολμης συγγνωμην ἀιτῶ. εὐχὴ τῆ ὑπὲρ ἐμῶν; τὴν
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
συνπεριφορὰν κομιζόμενος; ἀντεβλῆθη δὲ ἡ βιβλος; πρὸς τὸ ἐν καισαρία
ἀντίγραφον τῆς βιβλιοθήκης τοῦ ἁγίου παμφίλου χειρὶ γεγραμένον
αὐτοῦ (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, note 1). From this subscription we may
conclude with Dr. Field (Proleg. in Hexapla Origenis, p. xcix)
that the noble Library at Caesarea was still safe in the sixth
century, though it may have perished <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 638, when that city
was taken by the Saracens.
</p>

<p>
I. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Tischendorfian.</hi> II, at St. Petersburg. Add also
two large leaves of the sixth century, elegantly written,
without breathings or accents, containing 2 Cor. i. 20-ii. 12.
Described by Tischendorf, Notitia Cod. Sin. Append, p. 50, cited
as O in his eighth edition of the N. T.
</p>

<p>
K. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Mosquensis.</hi>
</p>

<p>
L. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Angelicus</hi> at Rome.
</p>

<p>
M. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Ruber</hi> is peculiar for the beautifully bright red
colour of the ink<note place='foot'>Scholz describes Codd. 196, 362, 366 of the Gospels as also written in red
ink. See too Evan. 254.</note>, the elegance of the small uncial characters,
and the excellency and critical value of the text. Two folio
leaves, containing Heb. i. 1-iv. 3; xii. 20-xiii. 25, once
belonged to Uffenbach, then to J. C. Wolff, who bequeathed them
to the Public Library (Johanneum) of Hamburg (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Cod. H
of the Gospels). To the same manuscript pertain fragments of
two leaves used in binding Cod. Harleian. 5613 in the British
Museum, and seen at once by Griesbach, who first collated
them (Symbol. Crit. vol. ii. p. 164, &amp;c.), to be portions of the
Hamburg fragment<note place='foot'>Dr. C. R. Gregory has read a few words more of this MS. Griesbach and
Scholz number the London part as 64, the Hamburg part as 53.</note>. Each page in both contains two columns,
of forty-five lines in the Hamburg, of thirty-eight in the London
leaves. The latter comprise 1 Cor. xv. 52-2 Cor. i. 15; x. 13-xii.
5; reckoning both fragments, 196 verses in all. Tischendorf
has since found one leaf more. Henke in 1800 edited the
Hamburg portion, Tregelles collated it twice, and Tischendorf in
1855 published the text of both in full in his <q>Anecdota Sacra
et Profana,</q> but corrected in the second edition, 1861 (Praef. xvi),
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
five mistakes in his printed text. The letters are a little
unusual in form, perhaps about the tenth century in date; but
though sometimes joined in the same word, can hardly be called
<emph>semicursive</emph>. Our facsimile (Plate <ref target='Plate_XII'>xii</ref>, No. 34) is from the
London fragment: the graceful, though peculiar, shapes both of
<hi rend='italic'>alpha</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>mu</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, ter) closely resemble those in some writing
of about the same age, added to the venerable Leyden Octateuch,
on a page published in facsimile by Tischendorf (Monum. sacr.
ined. vol. iii). Accents and breathings are given pretty correctly
and constantly: <hi rend='italic'>iota</hi> ascript occurs three times (2 Cor. i.
1; 4; Heb. xiii. 21)<note place='foot'>Griesbach (Symbol. Critic. vol. ii. p. 166) says that in the Harleian fragment
<q>Iota bis tantum aut ter subscribitur, semel postscribitur, plerumque omittitur,</q>
overlooking the second ascript. Scrivener repeats this statement about ι
subscript (Cod. Augiens. Introd. p. lxxii), believing he had verified it: but Tischendorf
cannot see the subscripts, nor can Scrivener on again consulting Harl.
5613 for the purpose. Tregelles too says, <q>I have not seen a <emph>sub</emph>scribed iota in
any uncial document</q> (Printed Text, p. 158, note).</note>; only ten <emph>itacisms</emph> occur, and ν ἐφελκυστικόν
(as it is called) is rare. The usual stop is the single point in its
three positions, with a change in power, as in Cod. E of the
Gospels. The interrogative (;) occurs once (Heb. iii. 17), and &gt;
is often repeated to fill up space, or, in a smaller size, to
mark quotations. After the name of each of the Epistles
(2 Cor. and Heb.) in their titles we read εκτεθεισα ὡς εν
πινακι, which Tischendorf thus explains; that whereas it was
customary to prefix an argument to each Epistle, these words,
originally employed to introduce the argument, were retained
even when the argument was omitted. Henke's account of the
expression looks a little less forced, that this manuscript was set
forth ὡς εν πινακι, that is, in vermilion, after the pattern of
Imperial letters patent.
</p>

<p>
N. (O<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi> Hort.) Two leaves of the ninth century at St. Petersburg,
containing Gal. v. 14-vi. 2; Heb. v. 8-vi. 10.
</p>

<p>
O. (N<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>c</hi> Tisch.) <hi rend='smallcaps'>Fragmenta Mosquensia</hi> used as early as
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 975 in binding a volume of Gregory Nazianzen now at
Moscow (S. Synodi 61). Matthaei describes them on Heb. x. 1:
they contain only the twelve verses Heb. x. 1-3; 3-7; 32-34;
35-38. These very ancient leaves may possibly be as old as the
sixth century, for their letters resemble in shape those in Cod. H
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
which the later hand has so coarsely renewed; but they are
more probably a little later.
</p>

<p>
O<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>. One unpublished double leaf brought by Tischendorf
to St. Petersburg from the East, of the sixth century, containing
2 Cor. i. 20-ii. 12.
</p>

<p>
O<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi> of the same date, at Moscow, contains Eph. iv. 1-18.
</p>

<p>
P. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Porphyrianus.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Q. Tischendorf also discovered in 1862 at St. Petersburg five
or six leaves of St. Paul, written on papyrus of the fifth century.
From the extreme brittleness of the leaves only portions can be
read. He cites them at 1 Cor. vi. 13, 14; vii. 3, 13, 14. These
also Porphyry brought from the East. It contains 1 Cor. i. 17-20;
vi. 13-15; 16-18; vii. 3, 4, 10, 11, 12-14, with defects.
This is the only papyrus manuscript of the New Testament
written with uncials.
</p>

<p>
R. Cod. Cryptoferratensis Z. β. 1. is a palimpsest fragment
of the end of the seventh or the eighth century, cited by Caspar
René Gregory as first used by Tischendorf. It is one leaf, containing
2 Cor. xi. 9-19. Edited by Cozza, and published
amongst other old fragments at Rome in 1867 with facsimile
(Greg., p. 435).
</p>

<p>
S. From Laura of Athos.
</p>

<p>
T. Paris, Louvre, Egyptian Museum, 7332 [iv-vi], 5-¾ x 4,
two small fragments, 1 Tim. vi. 3; iii. 15, 16. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Gregory,
p. 441, who, however, unconsciously classes it as an Evan.
</p>

<p>
ב. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2061.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>III. Manuscripts of the Apocalypse.</head>

<p>
א. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Sinaiticus.</hi>
</p>

<p>
A. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Alexandrinus.</hi>
</p>

<p>
B. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cod. Vaticanus</hi> 2066 (formerly 105 in the Library of the
Basilian monks in the city) was judiciously substituted by Wetstein
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
for the modern portion of the great Vatican MS., collated
by Mico, and published in 1796 by Ford in his <q>Appendix</q>
to Codex Alexandrinus, as also in 1868 by Vercellone and
Cozza<note place='foot'>Tregelles, wishing to reserve the letter B for the great Codex Vaticanus 1209,
called this copy first L (N. T. Part iv. p. iii), and afterwards Q (N. T. Part vi. p. i).
Surely Mr. Vansittart was right (Journal of Philology, vol. ii. No. 3, p. 41) in
protesting against a change so needless and inconvenient; nor has Tischendorf
adopted it in his eighth edition of the N. T.</note>. It is an uncial copy of about the end of the eighth
century, and the volume also contains in the same hand
Homilies of Basil the Great and of Gregory of Nyssa, &amp;c. It
was first known from a notice (by Vitali) and facsimile in Bianchini's
Evangeliarium Quadruplex (1749), part i. vol. ii. p. 524
(facs. p. 505, tab. iv): Wetstein was promised a collation of it
by Cardinal Quirini, who seems to have met with unexpected
hindrances, as the papers only arrived after the text of the New
Testament was printed, and then proved very loose and defective.
When Tischendorf was at Rome in 1843, though forbidden
to collate it afresh (in consequence, as we now know, of its
having been already printed in Mai's then unpublished volumes
of the Codex Vaticanus), he was permitted to make a facsimile
of a few verses, and while thus employed he so far contrived to
elude the watchful custodian, as to compare the whole manuscript
with a modern Greek Testament. The result was given in his
Monumenta sacra inedita (1846), pp. 407-432, with a good
facsimile; but (as was natural under the unpromising circumstances&mdash;<q><foreign rend='italic'>arrepta
potius quam lecta</foreign></q> is his own confession)
Tregelles in 1845 was able to observe several points which he
had overlooked, and more have come to light since Mai's edition
has appeared. In 1866, however, Tischendorf was allowed to
transcribe this document at leisure, and re-published it in full in
his Appendix N. T. Vaticani, 1869, pp. 1-20.
</p>

<p>
This Codex is now known to contain the whole of the Apocalypse,
a fact which the poor collation that Wetstein managed to
procure had rendered doubtful. It is rather an octavo than
a folio or quarto; the uncials being of a peculiar kind, simple
and unornamented, leaning a little to the right (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, note):
they hold a sort of middle place between square and oblong
characters. The shape of <hi rend='italic'>beta</hi> is peculiar, the two loops to the
right nowhere touching each other, and <hi rend='italic'>psi</hi> has degenerated into
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
the form of a cross (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Plate <ref target='Plate_III'>iii</ref>, No. 7): <hi rend='italic'>delta</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>theta</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>xi</hi> are also
of the latest uncial fashion. The breathings and accents are
<foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign>, and pretty correct; the rule of the grammarians
respecting the change of power of the single point in punctuation
according to its change of position is now regularly
observed. The scarcity of old copies of the Apocalypse renders
this uncial of some importance, and it often confirms the readings
of the older codices אAC, though on the whole it resembles
them considerably less than does Cod. P, and agrees in preference
with the later or more ordinary cursives.
</p>

<p>
C. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Ephraemi.</hi>
</p>

<p>
P. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Codex Porphyrianus.</hi>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Note.</hi> Of the three large uncials which contain the Apocalypse, אA are
complete, but C has lost 171 verses out of 405. In the 286 places
wherein the three are available, and Lachmann, Tregelles, and Tischendorf,
one or all, depart from the Received text, אAC agree fifty-two
times, אA seventeen, אC twenty-six, AC eighty-two, and this last combination
supplies the best readings: א stands alone twenty-three times,
A fifty-nine, C twenty-seven. When C has failed us אA agree fifty-two
times and differ eighty-eight.
</quote>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Chapter_VII'/>
<head>Chapter VII. Cursive Manuscripts Of The Gospels. Part I.</head>

<p>
The later manuscripts of the Greek Testament, written in
cursive characters from the tenth down to the fifteenth
century or later, are too numerous to be minutely described in an
elementary work like the present. We shall therefore speak of
them with all possible brevity, dwelling only on a few which
present points of especial interest, and employing certain
abbreviations, a list of which we subjoin for the reader's convenience<note place='foot'>Very many corrections have been made in the following Catalogue as well
from investigations of my own as from information kindly furnished to me by
Mr. H. Bradshaw, University Librarian at Cambridge, by Professor Hort, by
Mr. A. A. Vansittart, late Fellow of Trinity College there [d. 1882], by
Mr. W. Kelly, and especially by Dean Burgon, to whom the present edition is
more deeply indebted than it would be possible to acknowledge in detail. His
series of Letters addressed to me in the <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi> newspaper (1873) contains but
a part of the help he has afforded towards the preparation of this and the
second edition. Ed. iii.</note>.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Abbreviations used in the following Catalogue.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Act.</hi> MS. of Acts and Catholic Epistles.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> Ammonian Sections (so-called) in
the margin of MSS.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Apoc.</hi> MS. of the Apocalypse.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Apost.</hi> MS. of Apostolos.
</p>

<p>
Ἀναγν. Ἀναγνώσματα or ἀναγνώσεις, readings
or lections: here marks of the
lections in the margin or at the
head or foot of pages, or the computation
of them at the end of the book.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Argent.</hi> Written in silver letters, either
capitals or all.
</p>

<p>
Ἀρχή and τέλος, see <hi rend='italic'>Lect.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Aur.</hi> Written in gold letters, either
capitals (<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>l.</hi>) or all.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi> Epistle to Carpianus.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Chart.</hi> Written on paper.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Chart.</hi> by itself = linen paper.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Chart. b.</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>bombycina</hi>, or cotton paper.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Cols.</hi> Columns. When the MS. is written
only in one, no notice is given.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Coll.</hi> Collated.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Curs.</hi> Cursive MSS.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> Eusebian Canons standing in the
margin under Ammonian Sections.
</p>

<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi> Tables of so-called Eusebian
Canons prefixed to the Gospels.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Euthal.</hi> κεφ. Euthalian κεφάλαια found
in Acts and Epistles.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Evan.</hi> Evangelia.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Evst.</hi> Evangelistaria.
</p>

<p>
Ff. <hi rend='italic'>Folia</hi>, or leaves.  The figures in
brackets immediately appended
denote the number of lines on a
page.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Harm.</hi> Harmony, sometimes given with
κεφ. t.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Insp.</hi> Inspected.
</p>

<p>
Κεφ. Letters in the margin denoting
the κεφάλαια <hi rend='italic'>majora</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> Tables of κεφ. prefixed to
each book.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Lect.</hi> Notices of proper lessons for feasts,
&amp;c., in the margin, or above, or
below, or interspersed with the
text. Often marked with ἀρχή and
τέλος at beginning and end.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Membr.</hi> On vellum.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Men.</hi> A menology, or calendar, of Saints'
Days at the beginning or end of a book.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mus.</hi> Musical notes, especially in Evangelistaria.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> That the copy is mutilated.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Orn.</hi> Ornamented.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Paul.</hi> MS. of St. Paul's Epistles.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Pict.</hi> Illuminated with pictures.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Prol.</hi> Contains a prologue or ὑπόθεσις.
</p>

<p>
Ῥήμ. Where the ῥήματα, or phrases
are numbered.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Syn.</hi> A synaxarion, or calendar, of daily
lessons&mdash;also called <hi rend='italic'>eclogadion</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Στίχ. Where the στίχοι, or lines, are
numbered.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Subscr.</hi> Subscriptions (ὑπογραφαί) at the
end of books.
</p>

<p>
Τίτλ. Titles of κεφ. at the head or foot of the pages.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Vers.</hi> Greek or Latin metrical verses at
beginning or end of books.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi> Uncial MS.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The other Abbreviations will be evident upon perusing this work. Where
<hi rend='italic'>Chart.</hi> is not printed, the MS. is written on vellum. The Latin numeral within
square brackets denotes the date of the book, whether fixed by a subscription in
the book itself, or approximated by other means, e.g. [xiii] indicates a book of
the thirteenth century. The Arabic numerals within ordinary brackets denote
the number of lines on a page. Thus 297 (38) = 297 leaves and thirty-eight
lines in a page. The names within parentheses indicate the <emph>collators</emph> or
<emph>inspectors</emph> of each manuscript, and if it has been satisfactorily examined, an
asterisk is prefixed to the number by which it is known. If the copy contain
other portions of the New Testament, its notation in those portions
is always given. Measurements where given are in inches<note place='foot'>For the Authorities chiefly consulted in the list of Cursive Manuscripts
given in this edition, see Appendix <ref target='Appendix_A'>A</ref> to this volume; and for a list of
Facsimiles, see Appendix <ref target='Appendix_B'>B</ref>.</note>.
</p>

<div>
<head>(1) Manuscripts of the Gospels.</head>

<p>
*1. (Act. 1, Paul. 1.) Basiliensis A. N. iv. 2 at Basle [x, Burgon xii or
xiii], 7-3/8 × 4-½, ff. 297 (38); <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, ἀναγν. in Acts and
Epp. by later hand. Hebrews last in Paul. Gospels bound up last of all.
Among the illuminations were what have been said to be pictures
of the Emperor Leo the Wise [886-911] and his son Constantine
Porphyrogenitus, but all the beautiful miniatures were stolen prior
to 1860-2, except one before St. John's Gospel. Its later history
is the same as that of Cod. E of the Gospels: it was known to
Erasmus; it was borrowed by Reuchlin, a few extracts given by Bengel
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>
(Bas. γ), collated by Wetstein, and recently in the Gospels by C. L. Roth
and Tregelles, who have compared their results. Our facsimile (No. <ref target='Plate_IX'>23</ref>)
gives an excellent notion of the elegant and minute style of writing,
which is fully furnished with breathings, accents, and ι ascript. The
initial letters are gilt, and on the first page of each Gospel the full point
is a large gilt ball. In the Gospels the text adheres frequently to the
uncials Codd. אB, BL and such cursives as 118, 131, and especially 209
(Insp. by Burgon, Hoskier, Greg.).
</p>

<p>
2. Basil. A. N. iv. 1 [xv or earlier], 7-¾ × 6, ff. 248 (20), <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ. (not John), τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, is the inferior manuscript chiefly used by Erasmus
for his first edition of the N. T. (1516), with press corrections by his hand,
and barbarously scored with red chalk to suit his pages. The monks at
Basle had bought it for two Rhenish florins (Bengel, Wetstein, Burgon,
Hoskier, Greg.).
</p>

<p>
3. (Act. 3, Paul. 3.) Cod. Corsendonck. [xii], 4to, 9-¾ × 7, ff. 451 (24),
Carp., <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, once belonging
to a convent at Corsendonck near Turnhout, now in the Imperial Library
at Vienna (Forlos. 15, Kollar. 5). It was lent to Erasmus for his second
edition in 1519, as he testifies on the first leaf (Alter). It had been
collated before Alter by J. Walker for Bentley, when in <q>the Dominican
Library, Brussels.</q> This collation is unpublished (Trin. Coll. B. xvii. 34):
Ellis, Bentleii Critica Sacra, p. xxix (Greg.).
</p>

<p>
4. Cod. Regius 84 [xii], 7-¼ × 5-¾, ff. 212 (27), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., in the Royal Library at Paris
(designated RI by Tischendorf), was rightly recognized by Le Long as
Robert Stephen's γ´ (see Chap. V). Mill notices its affinity to the Latin
versions and the Complutensian edition (N. T. Prol. § 1161); <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> in
Matt. ii. 9-20; John i. 49-iii. 11; forty-nine verses. It is clumsily
written and contains <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> from some Fathers (Scholz, Greg.).
</p>

<p>
5. (Act. 5, Paul. 5.) Paris, National (Library), Greek 106 [xii or
later], is Stephen's δ´: 8-¼ × 6-1/8, ff. 348 (28), <hi rend='italic'>prob.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> Carefully written and full of flourishes (Wetstein, Scholz, Greg.).
</p>

<p>
6. (Act. 6, Paul. 6.) Par. Nat. Gr. 112 [xi or later], is Stephen's ε´;
in text it much resembles Codd. 4, 5, and 75. 12mo, 5-½ × 4-1/8, ff. 235,
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> with St. Chrysostom's Liturgy, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>
(Wetstein, Griesbach, Scholz). This exquisite manuscript is written in
characters so small, that some pages require a glass to read them.
Scholz collated Matt., Mark i-iv, John vii, viii (Greg.).
</p>

<p>
7. Par. Nat. Gr. 71 [xi], is Stephen's ϛ´. 8 × 6-¼, ff. 186 (29), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, τίτλ. with metrical paraphrase, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, very full <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> In style not unlike Cod. 4, but neater (Wetst.,
Scholz, Abbé Martin, Greg.).
</p>

<p>
8. Par. Nat. Gr. 49 [xi], 11-¼ × 8-½, ff. 199 (22), two columns, proved
by Mr. Vansittart to be Stephen's ζ´<note place='foot'>Stephen's margin cites ζ´ eighty-four times in the Gospels, usually in company
with several others, but alone in Mark vi. 20; xiv. 15; Luke i. 37. Since
Evan. 18 or Reg. 47 contains the whole N. T., and Stephen cites ζ´ in the Acts
once (ch. xvii. 5), in the Catholic Epistles seven times, in the Pauline twenty-seven,
in the Apocalypse never; Reg. 47 has been suggested to have been
Stephen's ζ´, rather than Cod. 8 or Reg. 49. On testing the two with Steph. ζ´
in eight places, Mr. Vansittart found that they both agreed with it in five
(Matt. xx. 12; Mark vi. 20; x. 52; Luke vi. 37; John vi. 58), but that in the
remaining three (Mark xii. 31; Luke i. 37; John x. 32) Reg. 49 agreed with ζ´,
while Reg. 47 did not.</note>: beautifully written in two columns
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
on the page. <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> (Wetst., Scholz, Greg.).
</p>

<p>
9. Par. Nat. Gr. 83 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1167, when <q>Manuel Porphyrogenitus was
ruler of Constantinople, Amauri of Jerusalem, William II of Sicily</q>: this
note (derived from Wetstein) is now nearly obliterate], 9-¼ × 6-¾, ff. 298 (20),
is probably Stephen's ιβ´. <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. (first leaf of St. John). It once belonged to Peter
Stella. The style is rather barbarous, and ornamentation peculiar
(Kuster's Paris 3, Scholz, Greg.).
</p>

<p>
10. Par. Nat. Gr. 91 [xiii or later], 7-½ × 5-7/8, ff. 275 (24), given in
1439 to a library of Canons Regular at Verona by Dorotheus Archbishop
of Mitylene, when he came to the Council of Florence. Scholz tells us
that it was <q>antea Joannis Huraultii Boistallerii.</q> Griesbach mistook
this copy for Reg. 95, olim  2865/3, which is Kuster's Paris 1 and
Wetstein's Cod. 10, being Cod. 285 of Scholz and our own list (Burgon,
<hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, Jan. 15, 1873). <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> (Griesbach, Scholz, Greg.).
</p>

<p>
11. Par. Nat. Gr. 121-2 [xii or earlier], in two small volumes,
6-3/8 × 3-5/8, neatly written, ff. 230 and 274 (16), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.,</hi> κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> It also once belonged to Teller (Kuster's Paris 4, Scholz, Greg.).
</p>

<p>
12. Par. Nat. Gr. 230 [xi], 10-3/8 × 8-1/8, 294 (21), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., with a commentary, that on St. Mark being Victor's
of Antioch (Greg.).
</p>

<p>
13. Par. Nat. Gr. 50 [xii], 9-¼ × 7-½, ff. 170 (29), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., is Kuster's Paris 6, who says that it
supplied him with more various readings than all the rest of his
Paris manuscripts put together. This, like Codd. 10, 11, once belonged
to Teller: it is not correctly written. <hi rend='italic'>Syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> in Matt. i. 1-ii. 20;
xxvi. 33-53; xxvii. 26-xxviii. 10; Mark i. 20-45; John xxi. 3-25; 163
verses (Kuster, Wetstein, Griesbach, Begtrup in 1797). This manuscript
was collated in 1868 by Professor W. H. Ferrar, Fellow of Trinity
College, Dublin [d. 1871], who regarded Codd. 13, 69, 124, 346 as
transcripts of one archetype, which he proposed to restore by comparing
the four copies together. His design was carried out by Professor T. K.
Abbott, Fellow and Tutor of Trinity College. For facsimiles of them
all, &amp;c., <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <q>Collation of Four Important Manuscripts of the Gospels,</q> &amp;c.
Dublin, 1877 (Greg.).
</p>

<p>
14. Par. Nat. Gr. 70 [xii or xiii, Greg. x], 6-7/8 × 4-5/8, ff. 392 (17), once
Cardinal Mazarin's; was Kuster's Paris 7. A facsimile of this beautiful
copy, with round conjoined minuscule letters, regular breathings and
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
accents, is given in the <q>Paléographie Universelle,</q> No. 78, and in
Montfaucon, Pal. Gr., p. 282. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 1-9; iii. 16-iv. 9. Κεφ.
<hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, Paschal Canon, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. t., κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>
(Kuster, Scholz).
</p>

<p>
15. Par. Nat. Gr. 64 [x], 7-¼ × 5-5/8, ff. 225 (23), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, is Kuster's Paris 8. <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> very
superb: the first three pages are written in gold, with exquisite miniatures,
four on p. 2, four on p. 3, Burgon. (Kuster, Scholz, Greg.)
</p>

<p>
16. Par. Nat. Gr. 54, formerly 1881 [xiv], 12-3/8 × 10, ff.?, 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>
(Latin), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (Matt. and Mark), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>; once belonged to
the Medici; it has a Latin version in parts; <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> Mark xvi. 6-20. <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (Wetstein, Scholz). This gorgeous and <q>right royal</q> copy was
never quite finished, but is unique in respect of being written in four
colours, vermilion, lake, blue, and black, according to the character of
the contents (Burgon, Greg.).
</p>

<p>
17. Par. Nat. Gr. 55 [xvi], 11-¾ × 8-¼, ff. 353 (25), 2 cols., has
the Latin Vulgate version: it was neatly written, not by George
Hermonymus the Spartan (but see Greg.), as Wetstein guesses, but by
a Western professional scribe, Burgon. It once belonged to Cardinal
Bourbon. <hi rend='italic'>Syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> very elegant, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (Wetstein, Griesbach, Scholz).
</p>

<p>
18. (Act. 113, Paul. 132, Apoc. 51.) Par. Nat. Gr. 47, formerly 2241
[<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1364], 11-½ × 8-3/8, ff. 444 (23), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>,
στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>; bought in 1687, and written at Constantinople. It is
one of the few copies of the whole New Testament (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, note), and
was given by Nicephorus Cannabetes to the monastery τοῦ ζωοδότου
χριστοῦ ἐν τῷ τοῦ Μυζιθρᾶ (Misitra) τῆς Λακεδαίμονος κάστρῳ.  Two <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>
between the Pauline Epistles and the Apocalypse, psalms, hymns (Scholz,
Greg., Reiche).
</p>

<p>
19. Par. Nat. Gr. 189, formerly 1880 [xii], 12-½ × 9-¼, ff. 387, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, Wetstein's 1869, once belonged to the Medici, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>,
with Victor's commentary on St. Mark, a catena to St. John, and scholia to
the other Gospels. In marvellous condition, with much gold ornamentation
(Scholz, Greg.).
</p>

<p>
20. Par. Nat. Gr. 188, formerly 1883 [xii], 13-1/8 × 9-1/8, a splendid folio,
ff. 274, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ.&mdash;all by second hand
(Greg.), brought from the East in 1669. It is beautifully written, and
contains catenae, Victor's commentary on St. Mark, and other treatises
enumerated by Scholz, who collated most of it. At the end of SS. Mark,
Luke, and John <q>dicitur etiam hoc evangelium ex accuratis codicibus esse
exscriptum, nec non collatum</q> (Scholz). A second (or perhaps the
original) hand has been busy here to assimilate the text to that of
Codd. 215, 300, or to some common model. In Cod. 215 the foregoing
subscription is appended to all the Four Gospels, and the other contents
correspond exactly (Burgon, Last Twelve Verses of St. Mark, pp. 119,
279). See on Evann. Λ, 428. Collated by W. F. Rose.
</p>

<p>
21. Par. Nat. Gr. 68, formerly 2860 [x], 9 × 7-1/8, ff. 203, 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, with <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> on paper in a later hand (Scholz, Greg.).
</p>

<p>
22. Par. Nat. Gr. 72, once Colbert. 2467 [xi], 10-¼ × 7-½, ff. 232 (22),
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
contains remarkable readings. John xiv. 22-xvi. 27. Fully collated
by the Rev. W. F. Rose (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 563). It begins Matt. ii. 2,
six leaves containing Matt. v. 25-viii. 4 being misplaced before it.
Κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> partial, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> No <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀρχ., or <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
Matt. iv. 20-v. 25; τέλ. p. m. A beautiful copy, singularly free from
itacisms and errors from homœoteleuton, and very carefully accentuated,
with slight illuminated headings to the Gospels, which I recently had
the pleasure of inspecting (Wetstein, Scholz, Scriv., Greg.).
</p>

<p>
23. Par. Nat. Gr. 77, Colbert. 3947 [xi], 9 × 7-¼, 4to, ff. 230, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, with the Latin Vulgate version down to Luke iv. 18.
<hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 1-17; Luke xxiv. 46-John ii. 20; xxi. 24, 25; ninety-six
verses (Scholz).
</p>

<p>
24. Par. Nat. Gr. 178, Colbert. 4112 [xi, Greg. x], 10-¼ × 5-7/8, ff. 240,
with a commentary (Victor's on St. Mark), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, and also <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, but in a later hand. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt, xxvii. 20-Mark
iv. 22; 186 verses (Griesb., Scholz). See Burgon, <hi rend='italic'>ubi supra</hi>, p. 228.
Used in Cramer's Cat. on St. Mark, 1840 (Greg.).
</p>

<p>
25. Par. Nat. Gr. 191, Colbert. 2259 [x, Greg. xi], 11-¾ × 9-1/8, ff. 292,
with Victor's commentary on St. Mark, and scholia, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (partial). <q>Grandly written,</q> but very imperfect, wanting about
715 verses, viz. Matt. xxiii. 1-xxv. 42; Mark i. 1-vii. 36; Luke viii.
31-41; ix. 44-54; x. 39-xi. 4; John xiii. 19?-xxi. 25 (Griesbach,
Scholz, Greg., Martin).
</p>

<p>
26. Par. Nat. Gr. 78, Colbert. 4078 [xi], 9-½ × 7-¼, ff. 179 (27), neatly
and correctly written by Paul a priest. <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> (Wetstein, Scholz, Greg.).
</p>

<p>
27. Par. Nat. Gr. 115, Colbert. 6043 [xi, Greg. x], 6-¼ × 4-¾, ff. 460 (19),
is Mill's Colb. 1. That critic procured Larroque's collation of Codd. 27-33
(a very imperfect one) for his edition of the New Testament. From
John xviii. 3 the text is supplied, cotton <hi rend='italic'>chart</hi>. [xiv]. κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> later), <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> Extensively altered by
a later hand (Wetstein, Scholz, Greg.).
</p>

<p>
28. Par. Nat. Gr. 379, Colbert. 4705 [xi], 9-1/8 × 7-1/8, ff. 292 (19), is
Mill's Colb. 2, most carelessly written by an ignorant scribe; it often
resembles Cod. D, but has many unique readings and interpolations, with
<q>many relics of a very ancient text hereabouts</q> (Hort on Mark vi. 43,
Introd. p. 242). Κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> (inaccurate), κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>
later), <hi rend='italic'>syn. Mut.</hi> in 334 verses, viz. Matt. vii. 17-ix. 12; xiv. 33-xvi.
10; xxvi. 70-xxvii. 48; Luke xx. 19-xxii. 46; John xii. 40-xiii.
1; xv. 24-xvi. 12; xviii. 16-28; xx. 20-xxi. 5; 18-25 (Scholz,
Greg.).
</p>

<p>
29. Par. Nat. Gr. 89, Colbert. 6066 [xii, Greg. x], 7-1/8 × 5-½, ff. 169, is
Mill's Colb. 3, correctly written by a Latin scribe, with very many
peculiar corrections by a later hand. Lost leaves in the three later
Gospels are supplied [xv]. Scholia, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> Mut. Matt. i-xv. Mill compares its text with that
of Cod. 71 (Scholz, Greg.).
</p>

<p>
30. Par. Nat. Gr. 100, Colbert. 4444 [xvi, Greg. xv], 8-7/8 × 5-7/8, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>,
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
ff. 313 (18), κεφ. (Gr. and Lat.), τίτλ., is Mill's Colb. 4, containing all the
Gospels, by the writer of Cod. 70. In text it much resembles Cod. 17
(Scholz, Greg.).
</p>

<p>
31. Par. Nat. Gr. 94, Colbert. 6083 [xiii], 7-1/8 × 5-½, ff. 188, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., is also Mill's Colb. 4, but contains all the Gospels with
prayers. This copy has many erasures (Scholz, Greg.).
</p>

<p>
32. Par. Nat. Gr. 116, Colbert. 6511 [xii], 5-¾ × 4-¼, ff. 244 (21), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> and ἀναγν. later), is Mill's Colb. 5. It begins
Matt. x. 22. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. xxiv. 15-30; Luke xxii. 35-John iv. 20
(Scholz). Mill misrepresented the contents of Codd. 30-32, through
supposing that they contained no more than the small portions which
were collated for his use.
</p>

<p>
*33. (Act. 13, Paul 17.) Par. Nat. Gr. 14, Colbert. 2844 [xi, Greg.
ix or x], fol., 14-¾ × 9-¾, ff. 143 (52), κεφ., τίτλ., is Mill's Colb. 8, containing
some of the Prophets and all the New Testament, except Mark ix. 31-xi.
11; xiii. 11-xiv. 60; Luke xxi. 38-xxiii. 26; and the Apocalypse.
In text it resembles Codd. BDL more than any other cursive manuscript.
After Larroque, Wetstein, Griesbach, Begtrup, and Scholz, it was
most laboriously collated by Tregelles in 1850. There are fifty-two
long lines in each page, in a fine round hand, the accents being
sometimes neglected, and <hi rend='italic'>eta</hi> unusually like our English letter h.
The ends of the leaves are much damaged, and greatly misplaced
by the binder; so that the Gospels now stand last, though on
comparing the style of handwriting (which undergoes a <emph>gradual</emph> change
throughout the volume) at their beginning and end with that in the
Prophets which stand first, and that in the Epistles which should follow
them, it is plain that they originally occupied their usual place. The ink
too, by reason of the damp, has often left its proper page blank, so that
the writing can only be read <emph>set off</emph> on the opposite page, especially
in the Acts. Hence it is no wonder that Tregelles should say that of all
the manuscripts he has collated <q>none has ever been so wearisome to the
eyes, and exhaustive of every faculty of attention.</q> (Account of the
Printed Text, p. 162.)
</p>

<p>
The next eight copies, like Cod. H of St. Paul, belonged to that noble
collection made by the Chancellor Seguier, and on his death in 1672
bequeathed to Coislin, Bishop of Metz. Montfaucon has described them
in his <q>Bibliotheca Coisliniana,</q> fol. 1715, and all were slightly collated
by Wetstein and Scholz.
</p>

<p>
34. Par. Nat. Coislin. 195, formerly 306 [xi, Greg. x], 11-¼ × 7-½, ff. 469
(22), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ.; <q>a grand
folio, splendidly written and in splendid condition</q> (Burgon), from Mount
Athos, has a catena (Victor's commentary on St. Mark) resembling that
of Cod. 194. Fresh as from the artist's hand.
</p>

<p>
35. (Act. 14, Paul. 18, Apoc. 17.) Par. Nat. Coislin. 199, formerly
44 [xi], 7-3/8 × 5-½, ff. 328 (27), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>,
στίχ., contains the whole New Testament (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, note), with many
corrections.
</p>

<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>

<p>
36. Par. Nat. Coislin. 20, formerly 26 [xi, Greg. x], 11-½ × 8-3/8, ff. 509
(19), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, with
a commentary (Victor's on St. Mark), from the <foreign rend='italic'>laura</foreign> [i.e. convent,
Suicer, Thes. Eccles. tom. ii. 205] of St. Athanasius in Mount Athos,
very sumptuous.
</p>

<p>
37. Par. Nat. Coislin. 21, formerly 238 [xii], 12-1/8 × 9-½, ff. 357, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, with short scholia, Victor's commentary
on St. Mark, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (Montfaucon).
</p>

<p>
38. (Act. 19, Paul. 23.) Par. Nat. Coislin. 200, formerly 500 [xiii],
6-7/8 × 5-3/8, ff. 300 (30), copied for the Emperor Michael Palaeologus [1259-1282],
and by him sent to St. Louis [d. 1270], containing all the N. T.
except St. Paul's Epistles, has been rightly judged by Wetstein to be
Stephen's θ᾽<note place='foot'>Stephen includes his θ᾽ among the copies that αὐτοὶ πανταχόθεν συνηθροίσαμεν,
which might suit the case of Coislin. 200, as St. Louis would have brought or
sent it to France. Mr. Vansittart tested Cod. 38 in Matt. xxvi. 45; Luke
viii. 18; xix. 26; James v. 5; 2 Pet. ii. 18, and found it agree in all with
Stephen's θ᾽. What of ἀγγελία, 1 John i. 5? In Luke viii. 18 that most careless
editor misprints β᾽ when he means θ᾽. See above, p. <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>, note 3.</note>. <hi rend='italic'>Pict.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> 143 verses; Matt.
xiv. 15-xv. 30; xx. 14-xxi. 27; Mark xii. 3-xiii. 4. A facsimile of
this beautiful book is given in the <q>Paléographie Univers.,</q> No. 84
(collated by Wetstein). Burgon has also a photograph of it, and, like
Wetstein and Silvestre, notices that it was Ex Bibl. Pattr. Cadomensium
[Caen] Soc. Jesu, 1640.
</p>

<p>
39. Par. Nat. Coislin. 23, formerly 315 [xi], 13-1/8 × 10-¼, ff. 288, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Greg.), κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., written at Constantinople with
many abbreviations εἰς τὸ πατριαρχεῖον, ἐπὶ Σεργίου [II] τοῦ πατριάρχου, and
in 1218 conveyed to the convent of St. Athanasius on Mount Athos.
With a commentary (Victor's on St. Mark, from the same original as
that in Cod. 34). Not <emph>written</emph> by Sergius, as Scholz says (Burgon).
</p>

<p>
40. Par. Nat. Coislin. 22, formerly 375 [xi], 11-¾ × 8-½, ff. 312, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, once belonged to the monastery
of St. Nicholas σταυρονικήτας, with a commentary (Victor's on St. Mark)
and <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi> Ends at John xx. 25.
</p>

<p>
41. Par. Nat. Coislin. 24, formerly 241 [xi], 4to, 12 x 9-½, ff. 224 (32),
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> (Mark), κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., contains SS. Matthew and
Mark with a commentary (Victor's on St. Mark).
</p>

<p>
42. Cod. Medicaeus exhibits many readings of the same class as
Codd. 1, 13, 33, but its authority has the less weight, since it has disappeared
under circumstances somewhat suspicious. Edward Bernard
communicated to Mill these readings, which he had found in the hand of
Peter Pithaeus, a former owner, in the margin of Stephen's N. T. of
1550: they professed to be extracted from an <q>exemplar Regium
Medicaeum</q> (which may be supposed to mean that portion of the King's
Library which Catherine de' Medici brought to France: above, p. <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>,
note 3), and were inserted under the title of <hi rend='italic'>Med.</hi> in Mill's great work,
though he remarked their resemblance to the text of Cod. K (N. T.,
Proleg. § 1462). The braggart Denis Amelotte [1606-78] professes to
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
have used the manuscript about the middle of the seventeenth century,
and states that it was in a college at Troyes; but Scholz could find it
neither in that city nor elsewhere.
</p>

<p>
43. (Act. 54, Paul. 130.) Par. Biblioth. Armament. 8409, 8410,
formerly Gr. 4 [xi], in two volumes; the first containing the Gospels with
<hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, the second the Acts and Epistles, 8-1/8 × 6-3/8, ff. 199 (23) and 190
(25), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> and
ἀναγν. later, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Greg.). Perhaps written at Ephesus; given by P. de
Berzi in 1661 to the Oratory of San Maglorian (Amelotte, Simon,
Scholz).
</p>

<p>
44. Lond. British Museum, Add. 4949 [xi], 12 × 9-¼, ff. 259 (21), <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (ἀρχή and τέλος later), <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> and
στίχ. in John, brought from Mount Athos by Caesar de Missy [1703-75],
George III's French chaplain, who spent his life in collecting materials
for an edition of the N. T. His collation, most imperfectly given by
Wetstein, is still preserved with the manuscript (Bloomfield, 1860).
</p>

<p>
45. Oxford Bodleian Barocc. 31 [xii or xiii], 7-¼ × 5-¼, ff. 399 (20), is
Mill's Bodl. 1, a very neat copy, with <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ. (occasional),
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (here and there), <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Mark ii. 5-15
(Mill, Griesbach).
</p>

<p>
46. Oxf. Bodl. Barocc. 29 [xi], Mill's Bodl. 2, 7-¼ × 5, ff. 342 (18), with
τὸ νομικόν and τὸ κυριακὸν πάσχα, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, vers., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., ἀναγν. Preliminary matter in
later hand (Mill, Griesbach).
</p>

<p>
47. Oxf. Bodl. Gr. Misc. 9 [xv], 4-¾ × 3-¼, ff. 554 (30), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. (Mark), <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi> (Polyglott, Mill, Greg.), in a vile hand,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, and much foreign matter, is Mill's Bodl. 6 and Bodl. 1 of Walton's
Polyglott (Polyglott, Mill).
</p>

<p>
48. Oxf. Bodl. Misc. Gr., formerly 2044 (Mill's Bodl. 5) [xii], 11-1/8 x 8-¾,
ff. 145 (50), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, ῥήμ., στίχ., scholia in a
later hand (Mill).
</p>

<p>
49. Oxf. Bodl. Roe 1, formerly 247 [xi], 5-¾ × 4-1/8, ff. 223 (26), ll. rubr.,
is also Mill's Roe 1, brought by Sir T. Roe from Turkey about 1628;
it has <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, some <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ.
(Luke) (Mill).
</p>

<p>
50. Oxf. Bodl. Laud. Gr. 33, formerly D. 122 [xi], 11 × 8-¾, ff. 241, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>
(Mark), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, some <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, στίχ., is Mill's Laud. 1
(<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>), surrounded by a catena (Victor's or Cyril's of Alexandria in
St. Mark), and attended with other matter. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 1-ix. 35;
xii. 3-23; xvii. 12-24; xxv. 20-32; John v. 29-end; and Mark xiv.
40-xvi. 20 is by a later hand. It contains many unusual readings (Mill,
Griesbach).
</p>

<p>
51. (Act. 32, Paul. 38.) Oxf. Bodl. Laud. Gr. 31, formerly C. 63 [xiii],
11-¾ × 8-¾, ff. 325 (28), 2 cols., Mill's Laud. 2, whose resemblance to the
Complutensian text is pointed out by him (N. T., Proleg. § 1437),
though, judging from his own collation of Cod. 51, his statement
<q>per omnia penè respondet</q> is rather too strong. <hi rend='italic'>Prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> The <emph>present</emph> order of the
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
contents (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>) is Act., Paul., Cath., Evangelia (Mill, Griesbach): but
it ought to be collated afresh. This is Bentley's γ in the unpublished
margin of B. xvii. 5 at Trin. Coll., Cambridge. He calls it a quarto,
400 years old. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> 2 Pet. iii. 2-17; Matt. xviii. 12-35; Mark ii. 8-iii.
4 (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Codd. 54, 60, 113, 440, 507, 508, Acts 23, Apoc. 28, Evst. 5).
</p>

<p>
52. Oxf. Bodl. Laud. Gr. 3, formerly C. 28 [dated <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1286], 6-½ × 5,
ff. 158 (27), elegant, written by νικητας ὁ μαυρωνης, is Mill's Laud. 5, with
<hi rend='italic'>Pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> in initio (Mill,
Griesbach).
</p>

<p>
53. Oxf. Bodl. Seld. supr. 28, formerly 3416 [xiv], 6 × 4-¾, ff. 140, is
Mill's Seld. 1, who pronounces it much like Stephen's γ᾽ (Cod. 4), having
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, ἀναγν., beautifully written (Mill, Griesbach).
</p>

<p>
54. Oxf. Bodl. Seld. supr. 29 (Coxe 54), formerly 3417, Mill's Seld.
2<note place='foot'><q>Textus ipse distinctus est in clausulas majores, seu Paragraphos; ad
initium notatos singulos literâ majusculâ miniatâ,</q> Mill (N. T. Proleg. § 1445).
Yet since Burgon testifies that its text <q>is not broken up into Paragraphs after
all,</q> Mill can only intend to designate in a roundabout way the presence of the
larger chapters (p. 55) with their appropriate capitals.</note> [dated <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1338], 4to, 6-3/8 × 4-¾, ff. 230 (sic), <hi rend='italic'>Syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi> (Mill). This is Bentley's κ (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Cod. 51). <hi rend='italic'>See
under</hi> 58.
</p>

<p>
55. Oxf. Bodl. Seld. supr. 6 (Coxe 5), formerly 3394, Mill's Seld. 3
[xiii], 4to, 7-½ × 5-½, ff. 349 (21), containing also Judges vi. 1-24 (Grabe,
Prol. V. T., tom. i. cap. iii. § 6), has <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> in Matt., κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. (Mill).
</p>

<p>
56. Oxf. Lincoln Coll. II (Gr.) 18 [xv or xvi], 4to, 8-1/8 × 5-5/8, ff. 232
(24), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, was presented about 1502, by Edmund Audley, Bishop of
Salisbury: <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> (Mark, Luke), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., some τίτλ., ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>,
titles to Gospels, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. (John). Walton gives some various
readings, but confounds it with Act. 33, Paul. 39, speaking of them
as if one <q>vetustissimum exemplar.</q> It has been inspected by Dobbin,
Scrivener, and Mill, but so loosely that the late Rev. R. C. Pascoe,
Fellow of Exeter College, detected thirty-four omissions for thirty-one
citations (one of them being an error) in four chapters.
</p>

<p>
57. (Act. 85, Paul. 41.) Oxf. Magdalen Coll., Greek 9 [xii, opening],
9 × 7-½, ff. 291 (25), <hi rend='italic'>aur.</hi> beautiful, in a small and beautiful hand, with
abbreviations. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Mark i. 1-11, and at end. Psalms and Hymns
follow the Epistles. It has κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ. (<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> in red, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi> later).
Collated twice by Dr. Hammond, the great commentator, whose papers
seem to have been used for Walton's Polyglott (Magd. 1): also examined
by Dobbin (Mill).
</p>

<p>
58. Oxf. New Coll. 68 [xv], 7-¾ × 5-¼, ff. 342 (20), is Walton and Mill's
N. 1. This, like Codd. 56-7, has been accurately examined by Dr.
Dobbin, for the purpose of his <q>Collation of the Codex Montfortianus</q>
(London, 1854), with whose readings Codd. 56, 58 have been compared
in 1922 places. He has undoubtedly proved the close connexion
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
subsisting between the three manuscripts (which had been observed by
Mill, N. T. Proleg. § 1388), though he may not have quite demonstrated
that they must be direct transcripts from each other. <hi rend='italic'>Prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.
(partially), τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (partial), ἀναγν. (partial), <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> (Mark), <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>,
with scholia. The writing is very careless, and those are in error who
follow Walton in stating that it contains the Acts and Epistles (Walton's
Polyglott, Mill, Dobbin). Mr. C. Forster rightly asks for photographs
and a thorough re-collation of Codd. 56, 58, 61, <q>to throw light upon
their direct relationship, or non-relationship to each other</q> (<q>A New
Plea for the Three Heavenly Witnesses,</q> 1867, p. 139). Dr. C. R.
Gregory has expressed the opinion that Codd. 47, 56, 58 are in the same
hand, and one of them copied from Cod. 54.
</p>

<p>
*59. Cambridge, Gonville and Caius Coll. 403 [xii], 8 × 6, ff. 238 (23),
an important copy, <q>textu notabili,</q> as Tischendorf states (much like D,
61, 71), but carelessly written, and exhibiting no less than eighty-one
omissions by ὁμοιοτέλευτον (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>). It was very poorly examined for
Walton's Polyglott, better though defectively by Mill, seen by Wetstein
in 1716, minutely collated by Scrivener in 1860. It once belonged to
the House of Friars Minor at Oxford, from whence Richard Brynkley
borrowed it and took it to the Grey Friars at Cambridge, whence it went
to Thomas Hatcher, who gave it to the College in 1867 (J. Rendel
Harris, The origin of the Leicester Codex, 1887). It has τίτλ., κεφ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (but not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), and exhibits many and rare <foreign rend='italic'>compendia scribendi</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
60. (Apoc. 10.) Camb. University Library, Dd. ix. 69 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1297], 8 × 6,
ff. 324 = 293 + 1 + 30 (24), but the Apocalypse is later, and has a few
scholia from Arethas about it. This copy is Mill's Moore 1<note place='foot'>On the death of Dr. John Moore, Bishop of Ely (whose honesty as a book-collector
is impeached, on no fair grounds, by Tew in Bridge's <q>Northamptonshire,</q>
vol. ii. p. 45, Oxon. 1791), in 1714, George I was induced to buy his books
and manuscripts for the Library at Cambridge, amounting to 30,000 volumes, in
acknowledgement of the attachment of the University to the House of Hanover.
Every one remembers the epigram which this royal gift provoked. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <q>Cap
and Gown,</q> p. 15.</note> and is still
badly known. <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (later), <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>
without <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, and it is an elegant copy (Mill). The Gospels
appear to have been written in the East, the Apocalypse in the West of
Europe. This is Bentley's ε (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Cod. 51).
</p>

<p>
*61. (Act. 34, Paul. 40, Apoc. 92.) Codex Montfortianus at Trinity
College, Dublin, G. 97 [xv or xvi], 6-¼ × 4-¾, ff. 445 (21), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, so
celebrated in the controversy respecting 1 John v. 7. Its last collator,
Dr. Orlando Dobbin (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> on Cod. 58), has discussed in his Introduction
every point of interest connected with it. It contains the whole New
Testament, apparently the work of three or four successive scribes, paper
leaves, only one of them&mdash;that on which 1 John v. 7 stands&mdash;being glazed<note place='foot'><q>We often hear,</q> said a witty and most reverend Irish Prelate, <q>that the
text of the Three Heavenly Witnesses is a <emph>gloss</emph>; and any one that will go into
the College Library may see as much for himself.</q> It was a little bold in
Mr. Charles Forster (<q>A New Plea,</q> &amp;c., pp. 119, 120, 139), whose zeal in defence
of what he held to be the truth I heartily revere, to urge the authority of
Dr. Adam Clarke for assigning this manuscript to the thirteenth century, the
rather since almost in the same breath, he stigmatizes the Wesleyan minister
for a <q>self-taught philomath</q> (p. 122). Dr. Clarke tells us fairly the grounds on
which he arrived at his strange conclusion (Observations on the Text of the
Three Divine Witnesses, Manchester, 1805, pp. 8-10), and marvellously unsound
they are. But what avails authority, <foreign rend='italic'>quum res ipsa per se clamat</foreign>? The facsimile
made for Dr. Clarke nearly seventy years ago has been copied in Horne's
Introduction and twenty other books, and leaves no sort of doubt about the date
of Codex Montfortianus.</note>,
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
as if to protect it from harm. This manuscript was first heard of between
the publication of Erasmus' second (1519) and third (1522) editions of
his N. T., and after he had publicly declared, in answer to objectors, that
if any <emph>Greek</emph> manuscript could be found containing the passage, he would
insert it in his revision of the text; a promise which he fulfilled in 1522.
Erasmus describes his authority as <q>Codex Britannicus,</q> <q>apud Anglos
repertus,</q> and there is the fullest reason to believe that the Cod. Montfortianus
is the copy referred to (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Vol. II. Chap. XI). Its earliest known
owner was Froy<note place='foot'>This Froy or Roy is believed by Mr. Rendel Harris (Origin of Cod. Leic., p. 48)
to be the forger of Cod. 61.</note>, a Franciscan friar, then Thomas Clement [fl. 1569],
then William Chark [fl. 1582], then Thomas Montfort, D.D. of Cambridge,
from whom it derives its name, then Archbishop Ussher, who caused the
collation to be made which appears in Walton's Polyglott (Matt. i. 1-Acts
xxii. 29; Rom. i), and presented the manuscript to Trinity
College. Dr. Barrett appended to his edition of Cod. Z a full collation
of the parts left untouched by his predecessors; but since the work of
Ussher's friends was known to be very defective, Dobbin has re-collated
the whole of that portion which Barrett left unexamined, comparing the
readings throughout with Codd. 56, 58 of the Gospels, and Cod. 33 of the
Acts. This copy has <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ.,
besides which the division by the Latin chapters in St. Mark is employed,
a sure proof&mdash;if any were needed&mdash;of the modern date of the manuscript.
There are many corrections by a more recent hand, erasures by the
pen, &amp;c. It has been supposed that the Gospels were first written; then
the Acts and Epistles (transcribed, in Dobbin's judgement, from Cod.
33, Acts); the Apocalypse last; having been added about 1580, as
Tregelles and Dr. Dobbin think, from Cod. 69, when they were both
in Chark's possession. The text, however, of the Apocalypse is not quite
the same in the two codices, nor would it be easy, without seeing them
together, to verify Dobbin's conjecture, that the titles to the sacred
books, in pale red ink, were added by the same person in both manuscripts.
In the margin of this copy, as of Cod. 69, are inserted many
readings in Chark's handwriting, even the misprint of Erasmus, ἐμαῖς for
ἐν αἷς, Apoc. ii. 13.
</p>

<p>
62. Walton's <hi rend='italic'>Goog.</hi>, which was brought from the East, and once belonged
to Dr. Henry Googe, Fellow of Trinity College. The collations
of Codd. D, 59, 61, 62 made for the London Polyglott were given in 1667
to Emmanuel College, where they yet remain. <hi rend='italic'>Goog.</hi> was identified with
the Cambridge Kk. v. 35 by Bp. Marsh, who was a little careless in this
kind of work.
</p>

<p>
62<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>. Camb. Univ. Lib. Kk. v. 35 [xv], 9-¼ × 5-¾, ff. 403 (14), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, κεφ.,
(κεφ. Lat.), τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi> Mr. Bradshaw has pointed out that Kk.
v. 35 is a mere transcript by George Hermonymus from Cod. 70 also
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
in his handwriting, and hastily copied from it, errors of the pen and all.
It has no <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, as <hi rend='italic'>Goog.</hi> had, but the ordinary κεφάλαια and <emph>Latin</emph>
chapters. Again, <hi rend='italic'>Goog.</hi>, as Walton says, <q>ex Oriente advectus est,</q> and
must have been in England before 1657; whereas Bp. Moore got Kk. v.
35 from France in 1706, with other books from the collection of J. B.
Hantin, the numismatist.
</p>

<p>
63. Cod. Ussher 1, Trin. Coll. Dublin, A. i. 8, formerly D. 20 [x],
fol., with a commentary, 12-3/8 × 9-½, ff. 237 (18-24), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, later.), <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> Henry Dodwell made a few
extracts for Bishop Fell's N. T. of 1675; Richard Bulkeley loosely
collated it for Mill, Dr. Dobbin in 1855 examined St. Matthew, and
the Rev. John Twycross, of the Charter House, re-collated the whole
manuscript in 1858. The last leaf, containing John xxi. 25, is lost;
but (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Scrivener, Cod. Sin., Introd., p. lix, note, and an admirable paper
by Dr. Gwynn in <hi rend='italic'>Hermathena</hi>, xix, 1893, p. 368) it originally contained
the verse and witnesses to it. Dr. C. R. Gregory has noticed in Cod. 63
a mutilated double leaf of an Evangelistarium in two columns [ix or x],
containing part of ὥρα γ᾽.
</p>

<p>
64. Bute, formerly Ussher 2. This MS. belonged, like the preceding,
to the illustrious Primate of Ireland, but has been missing from Trin.
Coll. Library in Dublin ever since 1742, or, as Dr. C. R. Gregory thinks
on the authority of Dr. T. K. Abbott, 1702. It was collated, like Cod.
63, by Dodwell for Fell, by Bulkeley for Mill. It once belonged to Dr.
Thomas Goad, and was very neatly, though incorrectly, written in octavo.
As the Emmanuel College copy of the Epistles (Act. 53, Paul. 30) never
contained the Gospels, for which it is perpetually cited in Walton's
Polyglott as <hi rend='italic'>Em.</hi>, the strong resemblance subsisting between <hi rend='italic'>Usser.</hi> 2 and
<hi rend='italic'>Em.</hi> led Mill to suspect that they were in fact the same copy. The result
of an examination of Walton's with Mill's collations is that they are in
numberless instances cited together in support of readings, in company
with other manuscripts; often with a very few or even alone (e.g. Matt.
vi. 22; viii. 11; xii. 41; Mark ii. 2; iv. 1; ix. 10; 25; Luke iv. 32;
viii. 27; John i. 21; iv. 24; v. 7; 20; 36; vii. 10; xvi. 19; xxi. 1).
That <hi rend='italic'>Usser.</hi> 2 and <hi rend='italic'>Em.</hi> are sometimes alleged separately is easily
accounted for by the inveterate want of accuracy exhibited by all early
collators. But all doubt is at an end since Dean Burgon in 1880 found
this celebrated copy in the library of the Marquis of Bute, and has traced
the curious history of its rovings. From Dr. Goad (d. 1638) it came into
the keeping of Primate Ussher, by whose hand the modern chapters seem to
have been written in the margin. Then towards the end of the seventeenth
century (as his signature proves) it belonged to one John Jones: a later
hand puts in the date Saturday, May 25, 1728. It has also the book
plate of John Earl of Moira (d. 1793). Then we trace it to James
Verschoyle, afterwards Bishop of Killala from 1793 to 1834, thence to
the Earls of Huntingdon for two generations, when it was purchased at
the Donnington Park sale by Lord Bute. Without doubt this is the
long lost Cod. 64, the <hi rend='italic'>Usser.</hi> 2 and <hi rend='italic'>Em.</hi> of Mill: it was recognized
at once by the reading in John viii. 8. Dean Burgon describes it
as [xii or xiii] now in two volumes, bound in red morocco about
150 years since. It has 440 leaves, 4-3/5 inches by 3-2/5 in size. <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>,
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
<hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (gilt), <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> (carmine), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀρχαί and τελη.
At the end are fourteen leaves of <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> Though beautifully written,
it has no <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> or elaborate headings. Previous collators had done their
work very poorly, as we have reason to know. Out of about sixty variations
in Mark i-v, Mill has recorded only twenty-six. Over each
proper name of a <emph>person</emph> stands a little waved stroke: cf. Evan. 530.
(Collated for Burgon.)
</p>

<p>
65. Lond. Brit. Mus. Harleian 5776 [xiii], 9 x 7, ff. 309 (22), is Mill's
Cov. 1, brought from the East in 1677 with four other manuscripts of
the Greek Testament by Dr. John Covell [1637-1722], once English
Chaplain at Constantinople, then Chaplain to Queen Mary at the
Hague, afterwards Master of Christ's College, Cambridge. <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.
t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> (Mill). This book was
presented to Covell in 1674 by Daniel, Bishop of Proconnesus. The
last verse is supplied by a late hand, the concluding leaf being lost, as
in Cod. 63.
</p>

<p>
*66. Camb. Trin. Coll. O. viii. 3, Cod. Galei Londinensis [xii], 8-¾ x 6,
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, ff. 282 (21), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi> ten blank pages, κεφ., no τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> (later), ἀναγν., κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, στίχ., once belonged to Th.
Gale [1636-1702], High Master of St. Paul's School, Dean of York
(1697), with some scholia in the margin by a recent hand, and other
changes in the text by one much earlier. Known to (Mill), but for
a time lost sight of. Collated by Scrivener, 1862. Inserted in the
great printed Catalogue of Manuscripts, Oxford, 1697.
</p>

<p>
67. Oxf. Bodl. Misc. Gr. 76 [x or xi], 9 x 7, ff. 202 (20), 2 cols., is
Mill's Hunt. 2, brought from the East by Dr. Robert Huntington,
Chaplain at Aleppo, Provost of Trinity College, Dublin, and afterwards
Bishop of Raphoe [d. 1701]. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> John vi. 64-xxi. 25. <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> On f. 3, the Athanasian Creed
is on <hi rend='italic'>rect.</hi> on gold ground (Mill).
</p>

<p>
68. Oxf. Lincoln Coll. (Evst. 199) II. Gr. 17 [xii], 8 x 5, ff. 29 (23),
<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ. (gold), <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, στιχ., besides <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, and verses at the end of each Gospel by Theodulos Hieromonachus,
is Mill's Wheel. 1, brought from Zante in 1676, with two other copies,
by George Wheeler, Canon of Durham. Between the Gospels of SS.
Luke and John are small fragments of two leaves of a beautiful Evangelistarium
[ix?], with red musical notes (Mill, Scr.).
</p>

<p>
*69. (Act. 31, Paul. 37, Apoc. 14.) Codex Leicestrensis [xiv Harris;
end of xv], 14-½ x 10-5/8, ff. 213 (38), like Codd. 206 and 233, and Brit.
Mus. Harl. 3161; rapidly written on 83 leaves of vellum and 130 of
paper, the vellum being outside the quinion at beginning and end, and three
paper leaves within (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>), apparently with a reed (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>), is
now in the library of the Town Council of Leicester. It contains the
whole New Testament, except Matt. i. 1-xviii. 15; Acts x. 45-xiv.
17; Jude 7-25; Apoc. xviii. 7-xxii. 21, but with fragments down to
xix. 10. The original order was Paul., Acts, Cath. Epp., Apoc., Gospels
last and missing when the MS. came into Chark's hands. Written in
the strange hand which our facsimile exhibits (No. <ref target='Plate_XIII'>40</ref>), <hi rend='italic'>epsilon</hi> being
recumbent and almost like <hi rend='italic'>alpha</hi>, and with accents placed over the
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
succeeding consonant instead of the vowel<note place='foot'>Another facsimile (Luke xxi. 36-John viii. 6) is given by Abbott in his
<q>Collation of Four Important Manuscripts</q> (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Cod. 13). In all four the
<foreign rend='italic'>pericope adulterae</foreign> follows Luke xxi. 38.</note>. The words Ειμι Ιλερμον
Χαρκου at the top of the first page, in the same beautiful hand that wrote
many (too many) marginal notes, prove that this codex once belonged to
the William Chark, mentioned under Cod. 61 (p. <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>) who got it from
Brynkley, who probably got it like the Caius MS. (Evan. 59) from the
Convent of Grey Friars at Cambridge. In 1641 (Wetstein states 1669)
Thomas Hayne, M.A., of Trussington, in that county, gave this MS. with
his other books to the Leicester Library. Mill was permitted to use it at
Oxford, and collated it there in 1671. A collation also made by John
Jackson and William Tiffin was lent to Wetstein through Caesar de
Missy and Th. Gee, a Presbyterian minister of But Close, Leicester.
Tregelles re-collated it in 1852 for his edition of the Greek Testament,
and Scrivener very minutely in 1855; the latter published his
results, with a full description of the book itself, in the Appendix to his
<q>Codex Augiensis.</q> No manuscript of its age has a text so remarkable
as this, less however in the Acts than in the Gospels. Though none of
the ordinary divisions into sections, and scarcely any liturgical marks,
occur throughout, there is evidently a close connexion between Cod. 69
and the Church Service-books, as well in the interpolations of proper
names, particles of time, or whole passages (e.g. Luke xxii. 43, 44
placed after Matt. xxvi. 39) which are common to both, as especially in
the titles of the Gospels: ἐκ τοῦ κατὰ μάρκον εὐαγγέλιον (<hi rend='italic'>sic</hi>), &amp;c., being in
the very language of the Lectionaries<note place='foot'>See the style of the Evangelistaria, as cited above, pp. <ref target='Pg080'>80-83</ref>; Matthaei's
uncials BH and Birch's 178 of the Gospels, described below. So B.-C. ii. 13, to
be described hereafter, reads in St. Matthew only ἀρχ᾽ ἐκ τοῦ κατὰ ματθαῖον ἁγίου
εὐαγγελίου. Compare also Codd. 211, 261, 357, and B.-C. iii. 5 in SS. Matthew
and Mark.</note>. Codd. 178, 443 have the same
peculiarity. Tables of κεφάλαια stand before the three later Gospels,
with very unusual variations; for which, as well as for the foreign
matter inserted and other peculiarities of Cod. 69, consult Scrivener's
Cod. Augiensis (Introd. pp. xl-xlvii). See also Mr. J. Rendel Harris,
Origin of the Leicester Codex, 1887.
</p>

<p>
70. Camb. Univ. Lib. Ll. ii. 13 [xv], 11-¼ x 7-¼ ff. 186 (23), <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>,
τίτλ. in margin, κεφ. Lat., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, was written, like Codd. 30, 62, 287, by
G. Hermonymus the Spartan (who settled at Paris, 1472, and became
the Greek teacher of Budaeus and Reuchlin), for William Bodet; there
are marginal corrections by Budaeus, from whose letter to Bp. Tonstall
we may fix the date about <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1491-4. It once belonged to Bunckle
of London, then to Bp. Moore. Like Cod. 62 it has the Latin chapters
(Mill).
</p>

<p>
*71. Lambeth 528 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1100], 6-½ x 4-¾, ff. 265 (26), is Mill's <hi rend='italic'>Eph.</hi>
and Scrivener's g. This elegant copy, which once belonged to an
Archbishop of Ephesus, was brought to England in 1675 by Philip
Traheron, English Chaplain at Smyrna. Traheron made a careful
collation of his manuscript, of which both the rough copy (B. M., Burney
24) and a fair one (Lambeth 528 b) survive. This last Scrivener in
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
1845 compared with the original, and revised, especially in regard to
later corrections, of which there are many. Mill used Traheron's collation
very carelessly. <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> [xv], κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> This copy presents a text full of interest, and much superior to
that of the mass of manuscripts of its age. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Cod. 29.
</p>

<p>
72. Brit. Mus. Harleian. 5647 [xi], large 4to, 10 x 8, ff. 268 (22, 24),
an elegant copy, with a catena on St. Matthew, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. (Mark), various readings in the ample margin.
Lent by T. Johnson to (Wetstein).
</p>

<p>
73. Christ Church, Oxford, Wake 26 [xi], 4to, 9-7/8 x 8-1/8, ff. 291, κεφ.
<hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, few <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> It is marked <q>Ex
dono Mauri Cordati Principis Hungaro-Walachiae, A<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>o</hi> 1724.</q> This and
Cod. 74 were once Archbishop Wake's, and were collated for Wetstein
by (Jo. Walker, <hi rend='italic'>Wake MS.</hi> 35)<note place='foot'>Of the 183 manuscript volumes bequeathed by William Wake, Archbishop
of Canterbury [1657-1737] to Christ Church (of which he had been a Canon),
no less than twenty-eight contain portions of the Greek Testament. They are
all described in this list from a comparison of Dean Gaisford's MS. Catalogue
(1837) with the books themselves, to which Bp. Jacobson's kindness gave me
access in 1861. Corrected by E. M., to whom similar kindness has been
shown. See also <q>Account of some MSS. at Christ Church, Oxford,</q> by the Rev.
Charles H. Hoole, Student.</note>.
</p>

<p>
74. Christ Church, Oxford, Wake 20 [xiii], 8 x 6, ff. 204, written
by Theodore (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, note 3). <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 1-14; v. 29-vi. 1;
thirty-two verses. It came in 1727 from the Monastery of Παντοκράτωρ, on
Mount Athos. <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>
</p>

<p>
75. Cod. Genevensis 19 [xi], 9 x 6-½, ff. 500 (19), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t,</hi> <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> In text it much resembles that of
Cod. 6. Seen in 1714 by Wetstein, examined by Scholz (collated Matt.
i-vi, John vii, viii), collated (Matt. i-xviii, Mark i-v) by Cellérier,
a Professor at Geneva, whose collation (Matt. i-xviii) is corrected
and supplemented with Matt. xix-end by H. C. Hoskier, though his
visit to the MS. was unfortunately short. The first diorthota made
corrections and additions as regards breathings and stops. Other corrections
made not much later (Hoskier, Collation of 604, App. G).
</p>

<p>
76. (Act. 43, Paul. 49.) Cod. Caesar-Vindobonensis, Nessel. 300,
Lambec. 28 [xi-xiii], 7-½ x 5-3/8, ff. 358 (27), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> This copy (the only one known to read αὐτῆς
with the Complutensian and other editions in Luke ii. 22) is erroneously
called an uncial by Mill (Gerhard à Mastricht 1690; Ashe 1691;
F. K. Alter 1786) (Greg.).
</p>

<p>
77. Caesar-Vindobon. Nessel. 114, Lambec. 29 [xi], 9-¼ x 8, ff. 300 (21),
very neat; with a commentary (Victor's on St. Mark), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> by a later hand). It once
belonged to Matthias Corvinus, the great king of Hungary (1458-90).
Collated in <q>Tentamen descriptionis codicum,</q> &amp;c. 1773 by (Treschow,
and also by Alter) (Greg.).
</p>

<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>

<p>
78. Cod. Nicolae Jancovich de Vadass, now in Hungary [xii], 9-1/8 × 5-¾,
ff. 293 (22), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> It was once in
the library of king Matthias Corvinus: on the sack of Buda by the
Turks in 1527, his noble collection of 50,000 volumes was scattered,
and about 1686 this book fell into the hands of S. B., then of J. G.,
Carpzov of Leipsic, at whose sale it was purchased and brought back to
its former country. A previous possessor, in the seventeenth century,
was Γεώργιος δεσμοφύλαξ Ναυπλίου. (Collated by C. F. Boerner for
Kuster, and <q>in usum</q> of Scholz.)
</p>

<p>
79. Leyden, Bibl. Univ. 74 [xv], Latin version older, 6-½ × 4-¾, ff.
208 (26-28), 2 cols., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν. (all partial). <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 1-xiv.
13. Brought by Georg. Douze from Constantinople in 1597, consulted
by Gomar in 1644 (Greg.).
</p>

<p>
80. Paris, Lesoeuf [xii], 9-1/8 × 6-3/8, ff. 309 (23), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ. (also
Lat. cent, xv), τίτλ. This MS. belonged to J. G. Graevius, and was
collated by Bynaeus in 1691: then it passed into the hands of J. Van
der Hagen, who showed it to Wetstein in 1739: afterwards it was
bought by Ambrose Didot at a sale, and sold to Mons. Lesoeuf, where
Dr. C. R. Gregory saw it. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Proleg. to Tisch. ed. viii. p. 485.)
</p>

<p>
81. Oxf. Bodl. Misc. Gr. 323, Auct. T. Infr. i. 5 [xiii], 7 × 5, ff.
182. Κεφ., τίτλ., some <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> Bought in 1883 from Mr. William Ward
who brought it from Ephesus. Contains Matt. xix. 15-xxi. 19;
31-41; xxii. 7-xxviii. 20; Mark i. 9-iii. 18; 35-xv. 15; 32-xvi.
14; Luke i. 18-ii. 19; iii. 7-iv. 40; v. 8-xxii. 5; 36-xxiii. 10;
John viii. 4-xxi. 18. This place has been hitherto occupied by Greek
MSS. cited in a Correctorium Bibliorum Latinorum of the thirteenth
century<note place='foot'>These formal revisions of the Latin Bible were mainly two, one made by
the University of Paris with the sanction of the Archbishop of Sens about 1230,
and a rival one undertaken by the Mendicant Orders, through Cardinal Hugo
de St. Caro (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> above, p. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>), and adopted by their general Chapter held at Paris
in 1256. A previous revision had been made by Cardinal Nicolaus and the
Cistercian Abbot Stephanus in 1150. A manuscript of that of 1256 was used by
Lucas Brugensis and Simon (Wetstein, N. T. Prol. vol. i. p. 85). Canon Westcott
calls attention to a <hi rend='italic'>Correctorium</hi> in the British Museum, King's Library,
1 A. viii.</note>. Dr. Hort appropriates this numeral to Muralt's 2<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>pe</hi>. (Evan.
473.)
</p>

<p>
82. Oxf. Bodl. MS. Bibl. Gr. e. I. Some fragments: (1) John iii. 23;
(2) 26, 27; (3) 2 Cor. xi. 3: Chart. (1, 2) [xiii], (3) [vi or vii] uncials
and minuscules intermixed, and some Coptic and Arabic words.
</p>

<p>
In this place other fragments have been placed till now. Seven
unknown Greek manuscripts of St. John, three of St. Matthew and
(apparently) of the other Gospels, cited in Laurentius Valla's <q>Annotationes
in N. T., ex diversorum utriusque linguae, Graecae et Latinae,
codicum collatione,</q> written about 1440, edited by Erasmus, Paris 1505.
His copies seem modern, and have probably been used by later critics.
The whole subject, however, is very carefully examined in the Rev. A.
T. Russell's <q>Memoirs of the life and works of Bp. Andrewes,</q> pp.
282-310. Hort's Cod. 82 is Burgon's Venet. xii, to be described
hereafter.
</p>

<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>

<p>
83. Cod. Monacensis 518 [xi], 8-½ × 6-½, ff. 321 (20), beautifully
written, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., in the
Royal Library at Munich, whither it was brought from Augsburg
(Bengel's August. 1, Scholz, Greg.).
</p>

<p>
84. Monacensis 568 [xii], 6-5/8 × 5-1/8, ff. 65, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>
both in the text and margin, contains SS. Matthew and Mark. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi>
Matt. i. 18-xiii. 10; xiii. 27-42; xiv. 3-xviii. 25; xix. 9-21; xxii.
4-Mark vii. 13 (Burgon, Greg.).
</p>

<p>
85. Monacensis 569 [xiii], 5-½ × 3-¾, ff. 30, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> in vermilion, τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), contains only Matt. viii. 15-ix. 17; xvi. 12-xvii.
20; xxiv. 26-45; xxvi. 25-54; Mark vi. 13-ix. 45; Luke iii. 12-vi.
44; John ix. 11-xii. 5; xix. 6-24; xx. 23-xxi. 9 (Bengel's
August. 3, Scholz).
</p>

<p>
86. Posoniensis Lycaei Aug. [x], 9-½ × 7-1/8, ff. 280, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> Once at Buda, but it had been bought in 1183 at Constantinople
for the Emperor Alexius II Comnenus (Bengel, Endlicher). It was
brought by Rayger, a doctor of medicine, from Italy, where it had been
carried, to Pressburg, to his brother-in-law Gleichgross, who was a pastor
in that place, amongst whose books it was sold to the library of the
Lycaeum in Pressburg. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Gregory, Proleg. p. 486.)
</p>

<p>
87. Trevirensis [xii], fol., contains St. John's Gospel with a catena,
published at length by Cordier at Antwerp. It once belonged to the
eminent philosopher and mathematician, Cardinal Nicolas of Cuza, on the
Moselle, near Trèves [1401-64: <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Cod. 129 Evan., and Cod. 59 Acts];
previously at the monastery of Petra or of the Fore-runner of Constantinople<note place='foot'>On fol. 4 we read ἡ βίβλος αὕτη (ἥδε 178) τῆς μονῆς τοῦ Προδρόμου | τῆς κειμένης
ἔγγιστα τῆς Ἀε[αι]τίου | ἀρχαϊκὴ δὲ τῆ μονῆ κλῆσις Πέτρα. Compare Cod. 178 and
Montfauc, Palaeogr. Graeca, pp. 39, 110, 305.</note>
(Scholz). Wetstein's 87 is our 250.
</p>

<p>
88. Codex of the Gospels, 4to, on vellum, cited as ancient and correct
by Joachim Camerarius (who collated it) in his Annotations to the New
Testament, 1642. It resembles in text Codd. 63, 72, 80.
</p>

<p>
89. Gottingensis Cod. Theol. 53 [1006], fol., ff. 172, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Eust.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, with corrections. Collated by A. G. Gehl in
1729 (?), and by Matthaei (No. 20) in 1786-7.
</p>

<p>
90. (Act. 47, Paul. 14.) Cod. Jac. Fabri, a Dominican of Deventer,
now in the library of the church of the Remonstrants at Amsterdam,
186 [xvi, but copied from a manuscript written by Theodore
and dated 1293], 4to, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 2 vols., κεφ. (Lat.), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> The
Gospels stand John, Luke, Matthew, Mark (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg090'>70</ref>); the Pauline
Epistles precede the Acts; and Jude is written twice, from different
copies. This codex (which has belonged to Abr. Hinckelmann of Hamburg,
and to Wolff) was collated by Wetstein. Faber [1472&mdash;living in
1515] had also compared it with another <q>very ancient</q> vellum manuscript
of the Gospels presented by Sixtus IV (1471-84) to Jo. Wessel of
Groningen, but which was then at Zvolle. As might be expected, this
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
copy much resembles Cod. 74.  See Delitzsch, Handschr. Funde, ii.
pp. 54-57.
</p>

<p>
91. Perronianus [x], of which extracts were sent by Montfaucon to
Mill, had been Cardinal Perron's [d. 1618], and before him had belonged
to <q>S. Taurini monasterium Ebroicense</q> (Evreux). Hort suggests, and
Gregory favours the suggestion, that this is the same as Evan. 299 (Cod.
Par. Reg. 177), which came from Evreux.
</p>

<p>
92. Faeschii 1 (Act. 49) [xiv or xv].
94. Faeschii 2 [xvi or xvii].
The former, 10-¼ × 8, ff. 141,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, contains St.
Mark with Victor's commentary on vellum, and scholia on the Catholic
Epistles, with the authors' names, Didymus, Origen, Cyril, &amp;c., and is
referred by Gregory to the tenth century; the latter, 8-½ × 5-½, ff. 172
(22), SS. Mark and Luke, with Victor's commentary on St. Mark, that
of Titus of Bostra on St. Luke, on paper [xv or xvi, Greg.]. Both
belonged to Andrew Faesch, of Basle, and were collated by Wetstein.
Dean Burgon found them both at Basle (O. ii. 27 and O. ii. 23).
</p>

<p>
93. Graevii [1632-1703] of the Gospels, cited by Vossius on the
Genealogy, Luke iii, but not known (Cod. 80? Greg.).
</p>

<p>
95. Oxf. Lincoln Coll. II. Gr. 16 [xii or earlier], 10-½ × 8, ff. 110 (20),
is Mill's Wheeler 2<note place='foot'>Noted <q>Ex libris Georgii Wheleri Westmonasteriensis perigrinatione ejus
Constantinopolitanâ collect. Anno Domini 1676.</q> See Evan. 68; Evst. 3.</note>. It contains SS. Luke and John with commentary,
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> Luke i. 1-xi. 2; John vii. 2-17; xx. 31-xxi. 10. With full
scholia neatly written in the margin, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (later), <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> (Mill,
Professor Nicoll).
</p>

<p>
96. Bodl. Misc. Gr. 8 (Auct. D. 5. 1) [xv], 5-3/8 × 3-¾, ff. 62 (18), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>,
is Walton's and Mill's Trit., with many rare readings, containing St. John
with a commentary, beautifully written by Jo. Trithemius, Abbot of
Spanheim [d. 1516]. Received from Abraham Scultet by Geo. Hackwell,
1607 (Walton's Polyglott, Mill, Griesbach).
</p>

<p>
97. Hirsaugiensis [1500, by Nicolas, a monk of Hirschau in Bavaria],
12mo, ff. 71, on vellum, containing St. John, seems but a copy of 96.
Collated by Maius, and the collation given in J. D. Michaelis, Orientalische
und exegetische Bibliothek, ii. p. 243, &amp;c. (Greg., Bengel<note place='foot'>Cod. 101 better suits Bengel's description of Uffen. 3 than 97: they are
written on different materials, and the description of their respective texts will
not let us suspect them to be the same. Wetstein never cites Cod. 101, but the
addition of τὸν θεόν at the end of John viii. 27, the reading of the margin of
Uffen. 3, has been erroneously ascribed in the critical editions to 97, not to 101.</note>,
Maius, Schulz).
</p>

<p>
98. Oxf. Bodl. E. D. Clarke 5 [xii], 8-½ × 6, ff. 222 (25), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., brought by Clarke from the East. It
was collated in a few places for Scholz, who substituted it here for Cod.
R (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>) of Griesbach.
</p>

<p>
99. Lipsiensis, Bibliothec. Paul, [xvi], 8-¼ × 7-1/8, ff. 22 (22, 23), Matthaei's
18, contains Matt. iv. 8-v. 27; vi. 2-xv. 30; Luke i. 1-13;
<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> (Matthaei, Greg.). Wetstein's
99 is our 155.
</p>

<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>

<p>
100. Paul. L. B. de Eubeswald [x], 4to, 9-¼ × 7-1/8, ff. 374, κεφ., τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, ἀναγν. later), vellum, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> John xxi. 25; <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, and in a later hand many corrections with scholia, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
J. C. Wagenseil used it in Hungary for John viii. 6. Now in the University
of Pesth, but in the fifteenth century belonging to Bp. Jo. Pannonius.
Edited at Pesth in 1860 <q>cum interpretatione Hungaria</q> by S. Markfi.
</p>

<p>
101. Uffenbach. 3 [xvi], 12mo, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, St. John στιχήρης. So near the
Basle (that is, we suppose, Erasmus') edition, that Bengel scarcely
ever cites it. With two others (Paul. M. and Acts 45) it was lent by
Z. C. Uffenbach, Consul of Frankfort-on-the-Main, to Wetstein in 1717,
and afterwards to Bengel. (Gregory would omit it.)
</p>

<p>
102. Bibliothecae Medicae, an unknown manuscript with many rare
readings, extracted by Wetstein at Amsterdam for Matt. xxiv-Mark
viii. 1, from the margin of a copy of Plantin's N. T. 1591, in the library
of J. Le Long. Canon Westcott is convinced that the manuscript from
which these readings were derived is none other than Cod. B itself, and
Dr. Gregory agrees with him. In St. Matthew's Gospel he finds the two
authorities agree seventy times and differ only five times, always in
a manner to be easily accounted for: in St. Mark they agree in eighty-four
out of the eighty-five citations, the remaining one (ch. ii. 22)
being hardly an exception. Westcott, New Test., Smith's <q>Dictionary
of the Bible.</q> Hort's Cod. 102 is w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> (Evan. 507), to be described
hereafter.
</p>

<p>
103. Regius 196 [xi], fol., once Cardinal Mazarin's, seems the same
manuscript as that from which Emericus Bigot gave extracts for Curcellaeus'
N. T. 1658 (Scholz). Burgon supposes some mistake here, as he
finds Reg. 196 to be a copy of Theophylact's commentary on SS. Matthew
and Mark, written over an older manuscript [viii or ix].  Perhaps the
same as 14 or 278 (Greg.).
</p>

<p>
104. Hieronymi Vignerii [x], from which also Bigot extracted readings,
which Wetstein obtained through J. Drieberg in 1744, and published.
Perhaps 697 (Greg.).
</p>

<p>
105. (Act. 48, Paul. 24.) Cod. Ebnerianus, Bodl. Misc. Gr. 136,
a beautiful copy [xii], 8 × 6-¼, ff. 426 (27), formerly belonging to
Jerome Ebner von Eschenbach of Nuremberg. <hi rend='italic'>Pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., the Nicene Creed,
all in gold: with <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> throughout and <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> prefixed by Joasaph,
a calligraphist, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1391, who also added John viii. 3-11 at the end
of that Gospel. Facsimile in Horne's Introduction, and in Tregelles'
Horne, p. 220 (Schoenleben 1738, Rev. H. O. Coxe, by whom the
collation was lent before 1845 to the Rev. R. J. F. Thomas, Vicar of
Yeovil [d. 1873], together with one of Canon. Graec. 110 of the Acts
and Epistles, both of which are mislaid).
</p>

<p>
106. Winchelsea [x], with many important readings, often resembling
the Harkleian Syriac: not now in the Earl of Winchelsea's Library
(Jackson collated it for Wetstein in 1748).
</p>

<p>
107. Bodl. E. D. Clarke 6 [xiv and later], 8-½ × 6-¾, ff. 351, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>,
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
κεφ., τίτλ., containing the Gospels in different hands. (Like 98, 111, 112,
<hi rend='italic'>partially</hi> collated for Scholz.) Griesbach's 107 is also 201.
</p>

<p>
108. Vindobonensis Caesarei, Suppl. Gr. 2, formerly Kollar. 4 [xi],
12-3/8 × 9-¼, ff. 426, 2 vols. With a commentary (Victor's on St. Mark:
Burgon, Last Twelve Verses, &amp;c., p. 288), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. It seems to have been written
at Constantinople, and formerly belonged to Parrhasius, then to the
convent of St. John de Carbonaria at Naples (Treschow, Alter, Birch,
Scholz).
</p>

<p>
109. Brit. Mus. Addit. 5117 [a.d. 1326], 7-¼ × 5-¾, ff. 225 (24-30), ll.
rubr., <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>,
στίχ., Mead. 1, then Askew (5115 is Act. 22, and 5116 is Paul. 75, these
two in the same hand; different from that employed in the Gospels).
</p>

<p>
110<note place='foot'>Cod. Ravianus, Bibl. Reg. Berolinensis [xvi], 4to, 2 vols., on parchment, once
belonging to Jo. Rave of Upsal, has been examined by Wetstein, Griesbach, and
by G. G. Pappelbaum in 1796. It contains the whole New Testament, and has
attracted attention because it has the disputed words in 1 John v. 7, 8. It is now,
however, admitted by all to be a mere transcript of the N. T. in the Complutensian
Polyglott with variations from Erasmus or Stephen, and as such has no
independent authority.</note>.  Brit. Mus. Addit. 19,386 [xiv], 11 × 8, ff. 267 (?), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>
(faded), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, with a dial of the year. Four
Gospels with commentary by Theophylact. Purchased from Constantine
Simonides in 1853. (Greg. 1260.)
</p>

<p>
111<note place='foot'><p>(Wetstein.) <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Velesian readings.</hi> The Jesuit de la Cerda in his <q>Adversaria
Sacra,</q> cap. xci (Lyons, 1626), a collection of various readings, written in
vermilion in the margin of a <emph>Greek</emph> Testament (which from its misprint in
1 Pet. iii. 11 we know to be R. Stephen's of 1550) by Petro Faxardo, Marquis of
Velez, a Spaniard, who had taken them from sixteen manuscripts, eight of
which were in the king's library, in the Escurial. It is never stated what
codices or how many support each variation. De la Cerda had received the
readings from Mariana, the great Jesuit historian of Spain, then lately dead,
and appears to have inadvertently added to Mariana's account of their origin,
that the sixteen manuscripts were in Greek. These Velesian readings, though
suspected from the first even by Mariana by reason of their strange resemblance
to the Latin Vulgate and the manuscripts of the Old Latin, were repeated as
critical authorities in Walton's Polyglott, 1657, and (contrary to his own better
judgement) were retained by Mill in 1707. Wetstein, however (N. T. Proleg.
vol. i. pp. 59-61), and after him Michaelis and Bp. Marsh, have abundantly
proved that the various readings must have been collected by Velez from <emph>Latin</emph>
manuscripts, and by him translated into Greek, very foolishly perhaps, but not
of necessity with a fraudulent design. Certainly, any little weight the Velesian
readings may have, must be referred to the Latin, not to the Greek text.
Among the various proofs of their Latin origin urged by Wetstein and others,
the following establish the fact beyond the possibility of doubt:
</p>
<p>
(For each of these, there is the reference, the Greek Text, the Vulgate Text, the
Vulgate various reading, and the Velesian reading.)
</p>
<p>
Mark viii. 38; ἐπαισχυνθῇ; confusus fuerit; confessus fuerit; ὁμολογήσῃ;<lb/>
Heb. xii. 18; κεκαυμένῳ; accensibilem; accessibilem; προσίτῳ;<lb/>
&mdash;&mdash;xiii. 2; ἔλαθον; latuerunt; placuerunt; ἤρεσαν;<lb/>
James v. 6; κατεδικάσατε; addixistis; adduxistis; ἠγάγετε;<lb/>
Apoc. xix. 6; ὄχλου; turbae; tubae; σάλπιγγος;<lb/>
&mdash;&mdash;xxi. 12; ἀγγέλους; angelos; angelos; γωνίας.
</p></note>. Bodl. Clarke 7 [xii], 8-¼ × 6, ff. 181 (31), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> Matt.),
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> John xvi. 27-xvii. 15; xx.
25-end, and
</p>

<p>
112<note place='foot'>(Wetstein.) <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Barberini readings</hi> must also be banished from our list of
critical authorities, though for a different reason. The collection of various readings
from twenty-two manuscripts (ten of the Gospels, eight of the Acts and
Epistles, and four of the Apocalypse), seen by Isaac Vossius in 1642 in the
Barberini Library at Rome, was made about 1625, and first published in 1673 by
Peter Possinus (Poussines), a Jesuit, at the end of a catena of St. Mark. He
alleged that the collations were made by John M. Caryophilus [d. 1635], a Cretan,
while preparing an edition of the Greek Testament, under the patronage of Paul V
[d. 1621] and Urban VIII [d. 1644]. As the Barberini readings often favour the
Latin version, they fell into the same suspicion as the Velesian: Wetstein
especially (N. T. Proleg. vol. i. pp. 61, 62), after pressing against them some
objections more ingenious than solid, declares <q>lis haec non aliter quam ipsis
libris Romae inventis et productis, <emph>quod nunquam credo fiet</emph>, solvi potest.</q> The very
papers Wetstein thus called for were discovered by Birch (Barberini Lib. 209)
more than thirty years later, and besides them Caryophilus' petition for the
loan of six manuscripts from the Vatican (Codd. BS, 127, 129, 141, 144), which he
doubtless obtained and used. The good faith of the collator being thus happily
vindicated, we have only to identify his eleven [Cod. 141 of the Gospels being also
Act. 75, Paul. 86, Apoc. 40. Another of his manuscripts was Act. 73, Paul. 80.]
remaining codices, most of them probably being in that very Library, and may
then dismiss the Barberini readings as having done their work, and been fairly
superseded.</note>. Bodl. Clarke 10 [xi], 5-¼ × 4-¼, ff. 167 (33), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, with commencement and large
letters in gold, having both <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, in Matt. i-Mark ii, in the
same line (a very rare arrangement; <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Codd. 192, 198, 212, and Wake
21 <hi rend='italic'>below</hi>), a very beautiful copy. These two, very partially collated for
Scholz, were substituted by him and Tischensdorf for collations whose
history is not a little curious.
</p>

<p>
113. Brit. Mus. Harleian. 1810 [xi], 8 × 7-¼, ff. 270 (26), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>
(later), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (Griesbach,
Bloomfield). Apparently this is Bentley's θ <q>membr. 4<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>to</hi> 600
annorum,</q> collated by him in the margin of Trin. Coll. B. xvii. 5 (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi>
Cod. 51). Its readings are of more than usual interest, as are those of the next.
</p>

<p>
114. Brit. Mus. Harl. 5540 [x], 5-¼ × 4-¼, ff. 280 (20) (facsimile in
a Greek Testament, published in 1837 by Taylor, London), very elegant,
with more recent marginal notes and Matt. xxviii. 19-Mark i. 12 in
a later hand. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. xvii. 4-18; xxvi. 59-73 (Griesbach, Bloomfield).
<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> (Luke, John). <hi rend='italic'>See</hi>
Canon Westcott's article, <q>New Test.,</q> in Smith's <q>Dictionary of the
Bible.</q>
</p>

<p>
115. Brit. Mus. Harl. 5559 [xii], 6-¾ × 5-¾, ff. 271 (19), κεφ., some
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, frequently <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi><note place='foot'>In Codd. 115 and 202 <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> is usually, in Codd. 116, 117, 417, 422, and B. M.
Addit. 15,581 but rarely, written under <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>: these copies therefore were probably
never quite finished. See p. <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, and note 1.</note>, once Bernard Mould's (Smyrna, 1724), with
an unusual text. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 1-viii. 10; Mark v. 23-36; Luke
i. 78-ii. 9; vi. 4-15; John xi. 2-xxi. 25 (Griesbach, Bloomfield).
A few more words of John xi survive.
</p>

<p>
116. Brit. Mus. Harl. 5567 [xii], 6-¼ × 5, ff. 300 (23), <hi rend='italic'>Syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, ἀναγν., στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, of some value.
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
It belonged in 1649 to Athanasius a Greek monk, then to Bernard
Mould (Griesbach, Bloomfield).
</p>

<p>
117. (Apost. 6.) Brit. Mus. Harl. 5731 [xv], 8 × 6, ff. 202 (28),
carelessly written, once belonged to Bentley. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 1-18:
<hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, fragments of
a Lectionary on the last twenty leaves (Griesbach, Bloomfield).
</p>

<p>
*118. Oxf. Bodl. Misc. Gr. 13 [xiii], 7-¾ × 5-¼, ff. 257, an important
palimpsest (with the Gospels <emph>uppermost</emph>) once the property of Archbishop
Marsh of Armagh [d. 1713]. <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, στίχ.,
ῥήμ. (<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> later), and some of the Psalms on paper. Later hands
also supplied Matt. i. 1-vi. 2; Luke xiii. 35-xiv. 20; xviii. 8-xix.
9; John xvi. 25-xxi. 25.  Well collated by (Griesbach).
</p>

<p>
119. Paris Nat. Gr. 85 [xii], 9 × 6-3/8, ff. 237 (23), formerly Teller's
of Rheims, is Kuster's Paris 5 (Griesbach, Gregory), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
120. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 185 [xiii], 7-½ × 5-3/8, ff. 177, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
formerly belonged to St. Victor's on the Walls, and seems to be Stephen's
ιδ᾽, whose text (1550) and Colinaeus' (1534) it closely resembles. St.
Mark is wanting (Griesbach).
</p>

<p>
121. Par. St. Geneviève, A. O. 34 [Sept. 1284, Indiction 12], 7-7/8 × 6,
ff. 241, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. v. 21-viii.
24 (Griesbach).
</p>

<p>
122. (Act. 177, Paul. 219.) Lugdunensis-Batavorum Bibl. publ. Gr.
74 A [xii], 7-1/8 × 5-½, ff. 222, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, once Meerman's<note place='foot'>Meerman's other manuscript of the N. T., sold at his sale in 1824, is No. 562.</note> 116. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Acts i. 1-14;
xxi. 14-xxii. 28; 1 John iv. 20-Jude 25; Rom. i. 1-vii. 13; 1 Cor.
ii. 7-xiv. 23 (J. Dermout, Collectanea Critica in N. T., 1825). Griesbach's
122 is also 97. See Cod. 435.
</p>

<p>
123. Vindobon. Caesar, Nessel. 240, formerly 30 [xi], 4to, 8-1/8 × 6,
ff. 328 (18), brought from Constantinople about 1562 by the Imperial
Ambassador to the Porte, Ogier de Busbeck; <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, corrections by another hand (Treschow,
Alter, Birch).
</p>

<p>
*124. Vind. Caes. Ness. 188, formerly 31 [xii], 4to, 8-½ × 7-1/8, ff. 180
(25), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>harm.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, an
eclectic copy, with corrections by the first hand (Mark ii. 14; Luke iii.
1, &amp;c.). This manuscript was written in Calabria, where it belonged to
a certain Leo, and was brought to Vienna probably in 1564. It resembles
the Harkleian Syriac, Old Latin, Codd. DL. i. 13, and especially 69
(Treschow, Alter, Birch). Collated by Dr. Em. Hoffmann for Professor
Ferrar where Alter and Birch disagree. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Cod. 13, for Abbott's recent
edition.
</p>

<p>
125. Vind. Caes. Suppl. G. 50, formerly Kollar. 6 [x], 8-¾ × 6-7/8,
ff. 306 (23), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ.,
<hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi> later), with many corrections in the margin and between the lines
(Treschow, Alter, Birch).
</p>

<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>

<p>
126. Guelpherbytanus xvi. 6, Aug. Quarto [xi], 8-¼ × 6-1/8, ff. 219 (26),
carelessly written, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, with <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> in a later
hand, and some quite modern corrections. Matt. xxviii. 18-20 is cruciform,
capitals often occur in the middle of words, and the text is of an
unusual character. Inspected by (Heusinger 1752, Knittel, Tischendorf).
</p>

<p>
N.B. Codd. 127-181, all at Rome, were inspected, and a few (127,
131, 157) really collated by Birch, about 1782. Of 153 Scholz collated
the greater part, and small portions of 138-44; 146-52; 154-57;
159-60; 162; 164-71; 173-75; 177-80.
</p>

<p>
127. Rom. Vatican. Gr. 349 [xi], 12-3/8 × 9-5/8, ff. 370 (16), ll. rubr.,
<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, a neatly written and
important copy, with a few later corrections (e.g. Matt. xxvii. 49).
</p>

<p>
128. Rom. Vat. Gr. 356 [xi Birch, xiii or xiv Greg.], 12-½ × 9-5/8, ff.
370 (18), ll. rubr., <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> with harmony, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ.
(p. 69, note).
</p>

<p>
129. Rom. Vat. Gr. 358 [xii], 11-¼ × 8-7/8, ff. 355, ll. rubr., <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi> (with
addition), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, with
scholia, Victor's commentary on St. Mark, and a note on John vii. 53,
such as we read in Cod. 145 and others. Bought at Constantinople in
1438 by Nicolas de Cuza, Eastern Legate to the Council of Ferrara (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi>
Cod. 87).
</p>

<p>
130. Rom. Vat. Gr. 359 [xiii Birch, xv or xvi Greg.], 11-1/8 × 8-¼, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>,
ff. 229 (26), ll. rubr., κεφ. lat., a curious copy, with the Greek and
Latin in parallel columns, and the Latin chapters.
</p>

<p>
131. (Act. 70, Paul. 77.) Rom. Vat. Gr. 360 [xi Birch, xiv or xv Greg.],
9-¼ × 7, ff. 233 (37), 2 cols., contains the whole New Testament except
the Apoc. (Birch), with many remarkable variations, and a text somewhat
like that of Aldus' Greek Testament (1518). The manuscript was given
to Sixtus V [1585-90] for the Vatican by <q>Aldus Manuccius Paulli F.
Aldi.</q> The Epistle to the Hebrews stands before 1 Tim. <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, of an unusual arrangement (viz. Matt. 74, Mark 46, Luke 57).
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. (<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> with <hi rend='italic'>init.</hi> later). This copy contains
many itacisms, and corrections <foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
132. Rom. Vat. Gr. 361 [xi Birch, xii or xiii Greg.], 10-5/8 × 6-¼, ff. 289
(20), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> in aur., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>
(later).
</p>

<p>
133. (Act. 71, Paul. 78.) Rom. Vat. Gr. 363 [xi?], 7-7/8 × 6-3/8, ff. 332
(29), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, Euthalian
prologues.
</p>

<p>
134. Rom. Vat. Gr. 364 [xi or xii], 4to, elegant, 8-½ × 6-1/8, ff. 297 (20),
<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, titles in
gold.
</p>

<p>
135. Rom. Vat. Gr. 365 [xi?], 9-5/8 × 7-7/8, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> The first 26 of
its 174 leaves are later and <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
</p>

<p>
136. Rom. Vat. Gr. 665 [xiii], 9-¾ × 6-¾, ff. 235 (32), on cotton paper;
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
contains SS. Matthew and Mark with Euthymius' commentary. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi>
Mark xv. 1-end.
</p>

<p>
137. Rom. Vat. Gr. 756 [xi or xii], 11-¼ × 8-½, ff. 300 (19), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, with a commentary (Victor's on St.
Mark). At the end we read κσ φραγκισκος ακκιδας ευγενης κολασσευς ...
ρωμῃ ηγαγε το παρον βιβλιον ετει απο αδαμ ζφο [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1583], μηνι ιουλιῳ,
<hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ινδ</hi>. <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ια</hi>.
</p>

<p>
138. Rom. Vat. Gr. 757 [xii], 11-¾ × 9-1/8, ff. 380 (37), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, with
commentary from Origen, &amp;c., and that of Victor on St. Mark, mixed up
with the text, both in a slovenly hand (Burgon). Comp. Cod. 374.
</p>

<p>
139. Rom. Vat. Gr. 758 [dated 1173 by a somewhat later hand
(Greg.)], 14-¾ × 10-7/8, ff. 233, contains SS. Luke and John with a commentary.
</p>

<p>
140. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1158 [xii], 9-¼ × 6-¾, ff. 408 (22), 2 cols., beautifully
written, and given by the Queen of Cyprus to Innocent VII
(1404-6). <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> In Luke i. 64 it supports
the Complutensian reading, καὶ ἡ γλῶσσα αὐτοῦ διηρθρώθη.
</p>

<p>
141. (Act. 75, Paul. 86, Apoc. 40.) Rom. Vat. Gr. 1160 [xiii], 2 vols.,
9-¼ × 6-½, ff. 400 (26), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Euthal.</hi>, contains the whole New Testament, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
The leaves are arranged in quaternions, but separately numbered for each
Volume (Birch).
</p>

<p>
142. (Act. 76, Paul. 87.) Rom. Vat. Gr. 1210 [xi], 4-¾ × 3-¼, ff. 324
(30), very neat, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> at end, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Euthal.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1447), containing also the Psalms. There are many marginal
readings in another ancient hand.
</p>

<p>
143. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1229 [xi], 12-½ × 9-¾, ff. 275 (24), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, with a marginal commentary (Victor's on St. Mark).
On the first leaf is read της ορθης πιστεως πιστῳ οικονομῳ και φυλακι Παυλῳ
τετάρτῳ [1555-59].
</p>

<p>
144. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1254 [xi], 6-1/8 × 4-5/8, ff. 267, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>
</p>

<p>
145. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1548 [xi Greg., xiii Birch], 7 × 5-1/8, ff. 161 (17),
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, contains SS. Luke and John.
<hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Luke iv. 15-v. 36; John i. 1-26. A later hand has written
Luke xvii-xxi, and made many corrections.
</p>

<p>
146. Rom. Palatino-Vatican. 5<note place='foot'>A collection presented to Urban VIII (1623-44) by Maximilian, Elector of
Bavaria, from the spoils of the unhappy Elector Palatine, titular king of
Bohemia.</note> [xii], 12-1/8 × 9-1/8, ff. 265 (13), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
Mark, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, contains SS. Matt, and Mark with a commentary
(Victor's on St. Mark?).
</p>

<p>
147. Rom. Pal.-Vat. 89 [xi Birch, xiv Greg.], 6-½ × 5-1/8, ff. 351 (20),
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ.
</p>

<p>
148. Rom. Pal.-Vat. 136 [xi Greg., xiii Birch], 7-½ × 4-1/8, ff. 153, κεφ.
<hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, with some scholia and unusual readings.
</p>

<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>

<p>
149. (Act. 77, Paul. 88, Apoc. 25.) Rom. Pal.-Vat. 171 [xiv or xv],
fol., ff. 179, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> in Cath. and Paul., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, contains the whole New
Testament (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, note).
</p>

<p>
150. Rom. Pal-Vat. 189 [xi or xii], 4-½ × 3-3/8, ff. 331 (23), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
151. Rom. Pal.-Vat. 220 [x or xi], 9-5/8 × 7, ff. 224 (28), ll. black and
gold, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, scholia in the margin,
and some rare readings (e.g. John xix. 14). The sheets are in twenty-one
quaternions. After St. Matthew stands εκλογη εν συντομω εκ των συντεθεντων
ὑπο Ευσεβιου προς Στεφανον λ.
</p>

<p>
152. Rom. Pal.-Vat. 227 [xiii], 8-½ × 6-¼, ff. 308 (20), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
153. Rom. Pal.-Vat. 229 [xiii], 4to, 8-¼ × 5-3/8, ff. 266 (25), ll. rubr.,
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> (full), στίχ.
</p>

<p>
154. Rom. Alexandrino-Vatican, vel Christinae 28 [dated April 14,
1442], written in Italy on cotton paper, 10-3/8 × 8-1/8, ff. 355 (40), ll. rubr.,
κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, and date later, true date xiii, Greg.), with
Theophylact's commentary. This and the two next were given by
Christina, Queen of Sweden, to Card. Azzolini, and bought from him by
Alexander VIII (1689-91).
</p>

<p>
155. Rom. Alex.-Vat. 79 [xi? Birch, xiv Scholz], 6 × 4-3/8, ff. 306 (20),
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., with some lessons from St. Paul prefixed.
Given by Andrew Rivet to Rutgersius, Swedish Ambassador to
the United Provinces. This copy is Wetstein's 99, the codex Rutgersii
cited by Dan. Heinsius in his Exercitat. sacr. in Evangel.
</p>

<p>
156. Rom. Alex.-Vat. 189 [xii], 4-¾ × 4, ff. 244 (23), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>; <q>ex bibliothecâ Goldasti</q> is on the first page.
</p>

<p>
157. Rom. Urbino-Vat. 2 [xii], 7-3/8 × 5-¼, ff. 325 (22), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> It belonged to
the Ducal Library at Urbino, and was brought to Rome by Clement
VII (1523-34). It is very beautifully written (Birch, N. T. 1788,
gives a facsimile), certain chronicles and rich ornaments in vermilion
and gold. On fol. 19 we read underneath two figures respectively
Ιωαννης εν <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>χω</hi> τω <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>θω</hi> πιστος βασιλευς πορφυρογεννητος και αυτοκρατωρ ῥωμαιων, ὁ
Κομνηνος, and Αλεξιος εν <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>χω</hi> τω <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>θω</hi> πιστος βασιλευς πορφυρογεννητος ὁ Κομνηνος.
The Emperor John II the Handsome succeeded his father, the great
Alexius, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1118. This MS. is remarkable for its eclectic text, which
is said by Zahn to approach sometimes that of Marcion (Geschichte d.
N. T. Kanons, i. 456, note 2, and 457, note 1). It is often in agreement
with Codd. BDL, 69, 106, and especially with 1.
</p>

<p>
158. Cod. Pii II, Rom. Vat. 55 [xi], 3-½ × 3, ff. 235 (20), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (partial), and readings in the margin, <foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign>.
This copy was given to the Library by Pius II (1458-64).
</p>

<p>
159. Rom. Barberinianus 464, formerly 8 [xi], 10-3/8 × 8-1/8, ff. 203 (23),
2 cols., κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, Matt., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> xvi), in the Barberini Library, at Rome,
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
founded above two centuries since by the Cardinal, Francis II, of
that name.
</p>

<p>
160. Rom. Barb. iv. 27, formerly 9 [dated 1123], 8-7/8 × 7-1/8, ff. 216,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>
</p>

<p>
161. Rom. Barb. iii. 17, formerly 10 [x or xi], 8 × 6-½, ff. 203 (24),
2 cols., κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> later), ending at John xvi. 4.
This copy follows the Latin version both in its text (John iii. 6) and
marginal scholia (John vii. 29). Various readings are often thus noted in
its margin.
</p>

<p>
162. Rom. Barb. iv. 31, formerly 11 [dated May 13, 1153 (ϛχξά),
Indict. 1], 9-¼ × 6-¾, written by one Manuel: ff. 248 (23), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>
</p>

<p>
163. Rom. Barb. v. 16, formerly 12 [xi], 11-1/8 × 8, ff. 173 (33),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>,
written in Syria. Scholz says it contains only the portions of the
Gospels read in Church-lessons, but Birch the four Gospels, with the
numbers of ῥήματα and στίχοι to the first three Gospels.
</p>

<p>
164. Rom. Barb. iii. 38, formerly 13 [dated Oct. 1039], 6-7/8 × 5-3/8, ff. 214
(27), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> later), and the numbers of στίχοι. The subscription states that it
was written by Leo, a priest and calligrapher, and bought in 1168 by
Bartholomew, who compared it with ancient Jerusalem manuscripts on
the sacred mount.
</p>

<p>
165. Rom. Barb. v. 37, formerly 14 [dated 1291], 11-7/8 x 8, ff. 215,
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, with the Latin
Vulgate version. Written for one Archbishop Paul, and given to the
Library by Eugenia, daughter of Jo. Pontanus.
</p>

<p>
166. Rom. Barb. iii. 131, formerly 115 [xiii], 4to, 8-3/8 × 6-½, ff. 75 (27),
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, containing only SS. Luke ix. 33-xxiv. 24
and John.
</p>

<p>
167. Rom. Barb. iii. 6, formerly 208 [xiii], 4-7/8 × 3-¼, ff. 264 (25), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (later).
</p>

<p>
168. Rom. Barb. vi. 9, formerly 211 [xiii], 13-3/8 × 8-5/8, ff. 217, 2 cols.,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> (Mark <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ.).
</p>

<p>
169. Rom. Vallicellianus B. 133 [xi], 4-¾ × 4, ff. 249 (19), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, once the property of
Achilles Statius, as also was Cod. 171. This codex and the next three
are in the Library of St. Maria in Vallicella at Rome, and belong to the
Fathers of the Oratory of St. Philippo Neri.
</p>

<p>
170. Rom. Vallicell. C. 61 [xiii-xv], 8-½ × 6-¼, ff. 277 (23), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. (occasionally in later
hand). The end of St. Luke and most of St. John is in a later hand.
</p>

<p>
171. Rom. Vallicell. C. 73 [xiv, Montfaucon xi], 5-¾ × 4-¼, ff. 253 (20),
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>
172. Rom. Vallicell. F. 90 [xii], 4to, ff. 217, now only contains the
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
Pentateuch, but from Bianchini, I. ii. pp. 529-30, we infer that the
Gospels were once there.
</p>

<p>
173. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1983, formerly Basil. 22, ending John xiii. 1,
seems to have been written in Asia Minor [xi Birch and Burgon, xii or
xiii Greg.], 7-7/8 × 5-¼, ff. 155 (20), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>; ῥήμ., στίχ. as in Codd. 163, 164, 167.
This codex, and the next four, were brought from the Library of the
Basilian monks.
</p>

<p>
174. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2002, formerly Basil. 41 [dated second hour of
Sept. 7, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1052], 9-¾ × 7-½, ff. 132 (30), 2 cols., κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 1-ii. 1; John i. 1-27; ending
John viii. 47. Written by the monk Constantine <q>tabernis habitante,</q>
<q>cum praeesset praefecturae Georgilas dux Calabriae</q> (Scholz).
</p>

<p>
175. (Act. 41, Paul. 194, Apoc. 20.) Rom. Vat. Gr. 2080, formerly
Basil. 119 [x-xii], 8 × 5-¾, ff. 247, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, contains the whole New
Testament, beginning Matt. iv. 17, with scholia to the Acts, between
which and the Catholic Epistles stands the Apocalypse. There
are some marginal corrections <foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign> (e.g. Luke xxiv. 13).
The Pauline Epistles have Euthalius' subscriptions. Also inspected
by Bianchini.
</p>

<p>
176. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2113, formerly Basil. 152 [x or xi], 8-¼ × 5-¾, ff. 77,
ll. coloured, John ii. 1, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> Begins Matt. x. 13, ends
John ii. 1.
</p>

<p>
177. Rom. Vat. Gr.? formerly Basil. 163 [xi], 8vo, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> John i. 1-29.
Dr. Gregory thinks that it is 2115, his Evan. 870.
</p>

<p>
178. Rom. Angelicus A. 1. 5 [xii], 14-7/8 × 11-5/8, ff. 272 (23), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ. with harmony, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> Jo. xxi. 17-25. Arranged
in quaternions, and the titles to the Gospels resemble those in Cod. 69.
Codd. 178-9 belong to the Angelica convent of Augustinian Eremites at
Rome. It has on the first leaf the same subscription as we gave under
Cod. 87, and which Birch and Scholz misunderstand.
</p>

<p>
179. Rom. Angelic. A. 4. 11 [xii], 7-¾ × 6-½, ff. 248 (22), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, xv or xvi, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>). The last five
leaves (214-18) and two others (23, 30) are <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, and in a later hand.
</p>

<p>
180. (Act. 82, Paul. 92, Apoc. 44.) Rom. Propagandae L. vi. 19,
formerly 251, before Borgiae 2 [Gospels xi, Greg. xiv], 8-1/8 × 5-¼, ff.?
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, xv <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>); the Gospels
were written by one Andreas: the rest of the New Testament and some
apocryphal books by one John, November, 1284<note place='foot'>Or rather <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1274. According to Engelbreth the letters stand ψτψπβ,
which can only mean <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.m.</hi> 6782 (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, note 2).</note>. This manuscript,
with Cod. T and Evst. 37, belonged to the Velitrant Museum of
<q>Praesul Steph. Borgia, Collegii Urbani de Propaganda Fide a secretis.</q>
</p>

<p>
181. Cod. Francisci Xavier, Cardinal. de Zelada [xi], fol., ff. 596, with
scholia in the margin.  This manuscript (from which Birch took
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
extracts) is now missing. Compare Birch, N. T., Proleg. p. lviii; Burgon,
Last Twelve Verses &amp;c., pp. 284, 288.
</p>

<p>
Codd. 182-198, all in that noble Library at Florence, founded by
Cosmo de' Medici [d. 1464], increased by his grandson Lorenzo [d. 1492],
were very slightly examined by Birch, and subsequently by Scholz.
Dean Burgon has described his own researches at Florence in the
<hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi> for August 20 and 27, 1873, from which I have thankfully
corrected the statements made in my first edition respecting all the
manuscripts there. They have been examined since then more leisurely
by Dr. Gregory, from whose careful account some particulars have been
added in this edition (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Greg., Prolegomena (ii), pp. 505-509).
</p>

<p>
182. Flor. Laurentianus Plut. vi. 11 [xii], 10 × 7-1/8, ff. 226 (24), κεφ.
<hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ. to St. John only, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> (in Luke). The titles of the
Gospels in lake, forming a kind of imitation of ropework.
</p>

<p>
183. Flor. Laur. vi. 14 [xiv, xii Greg.], 6-½ × 5-1/8, ff. 349 (19), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> in gold; and in a later hand, <hi rend='italic'>capp. Lat.</hi>,
ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, at the end of which is τέλος σὺν Θεῷ ἁγίῳ τοῦ μηνολογίου,
ἀμήν; αυιή´, i.e. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1418. This mode of reckoning is very rare
(<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, note 2), and tempted Scholz to read ϛυιή of the Greek era, i.e.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 910.
</p>

<p>
184. Flor. Laur. vi. 15 [xiii], 11-¼ × 5-½, ff. 72 (49), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> Left in an unfinished state.
</p>

<p>
185. Flor. Laur. vi. 16 [xii], 14 × 6-¾, ff. 341 (21), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. The summary of the Synaxarion is
subscribed Πόνος Βασιλείου, καὶ Θῦ λόγου λόγοι (Burgon).
</p>

<p>
186. Flor. Laur. vi. 18 [xi], fol., 11-1/8 × 8-½, ff. 260 (20), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (Matt.), commentary
(Victor's on St. Mark); written by Leontius, a calligrapher. Burgon
cites Bandini's Catal. i. 130-3, where the elaborate <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> are given in
full.
</p>

<p>
187. Flor. Laur. vi. 23 [xii], 7-7/8 x 6-¼, ff. 212 (25), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> very rich and
numerous. <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), all in gold. A
peculiar kind of asterisk occurs very frequently in the text and margin,
the purpose of which is not clear.
</p>

<p>
188. Flor. Laur. vi. 25 [xi], 6 × 4-½, ff. 228 (26), <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> full
and beautiful. <hi rend='italic'>Prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ.
</p>

<p>
189. (Act. 141, Paul. 239.) Flor. Laur. vi. 27 [xii], 4-½ × 3-7/8, ff. 452
(24), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>Euthal.</hi> in Cath. and Paul., minute and
beautifully written, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> from John xix. 38.
</p>

<p>
190. Flor. Laur. vi. 28 [July, 1285, Ind. 13], 8vo, 5-5/8 × 4-3/8, ff. 439
(17), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
191. Flor. Laur. vi. 29 [xiii], 5-1/8 × 3-¾, ff. 180 (27), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. Lat.,
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, with στίχοι numbered: ἀναγνώσματα marked in a more recent
hand.
</p>

<p>
192. Flor. Laur. vi. 30 [xiii], 4-¾ × 3-½, ff. 200 (28), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> in one line, the latter later (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Cod.
112): ἀρχὴ of <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, never τέλος.
</p>

<p>
193. Flor. Laur. vi. 32 [xi], 8vo, 6-¼ × 5, ff. 165 (27), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), (ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> in later hand).
</p>

<p>
194. Flor. Laur. vi. 33 [xi], 11-¾ × 9-¾, ff. 263 (22), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, and a marginal
catena (Victor's on St. Mark) resembling that of Cod. 34: e.g. on Luke
xxiv. 13. Κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> Begins Matt. iii. 7.
</p>

<p>
195. Flor. Laur. vi. 34 [xi], 10-7/8 × 8-5/8, ff. 277 (25), once belonged to
the Cistercian convent of S. Salvator de Septimo. <hi rend='italic'>Prol.</hi> (the same as in
Cod. 186 but briefer, attributed to Eusebius), <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, and a commentary
(Victor's on St. Mark). The date of the year is lost, but the month
(May) and indiction (8) remain. Κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>
</p>

<p>
196. Flor. Laur. viii. 12 [xii], 9-¾ × 7-¼, ff. 369 (44), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> (all
together at the beginning), κεφ., τίτλ., the text in red letters (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>,
note 1), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, with a catena in black. Given by a son of Cosmo de'
Medici in 1473 to the Convent of St. Mark at Florence.
</p>

<p>
197. (Act. 90.) Flor. Laur. viii. 14 [xi], fol., 11-¾ × 9-¼, ff. 154 (29),
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., contains the Epistle of St. James with
a marginal gloss: also portions of SS. Matthew and Mark, with Chrysostom's
commentary on St. Matthew, and Victor's on St. Mark, all
imperfect.
</p>

<p>
198. Flor. Laur. Ædil. 221 [xiii], 4to, 9-¾ × 6-5/8, ff. 171 (29), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>: from the library <q>Aedilium
Flor. Ecc.</q> Here again <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> are in the same line (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Cod. 112):
the ἀναγνώσματα also are numbered.
</p>

<p>
Codd. 199-203 were inspected, rather than collated, by Birch at
Florence before 1788; the first two in the Benedictine library of St.
Maria; the others in that of St. Mark, belonging to the Dominican Friars.
Scholz could not find any of them, but 201 is Wetstein's 107, Scrivener's
m; 202 is now in the British Museum, Addit. 14,774. The other two
Burgon found in the Laurentian Library, whither they came at the
suppression of monasteries in 1810. They were examined afterwards by
Gregory.
</p>

<p>
199. Flor. Laur. Conv. Sopp. 160, formerly Badia 99 or S. Mariae 67
[xii], 5-5/8 × 4-¾, ff. 229 (25), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> with <hi rend='italic'>harm.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, with iambic verses and various scholia. The στίχοι are
numbered and, besides <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, there exists in parts a Harmony at the
foot of the pages, such as is described in p. <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, note 2.
</p>

<p>
200. Flor. Laur. Conv. Sopp. 159, formerly Badia 69 or S. Mariae 66
[x], 8-¾ × 6-7/8, ff. 229 (25), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, all in gold:
<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> in red, κεφ., τίτλ., with fragments of Gregory of Nyssa against the
Arians (<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> xiv). There are many scholia in vermilion
scattered throughout the book. Codd. 199, 200 were presented to St.
Maria's by Antonia Corbinelli [d. 1423]: the latter from St. Justina's,
another Benedictine house.
</p>

<p>
*201. (Act. 91, Paul. 104, Apoc. 94.) Lond. Brit. Mus. Addit. 11,837,
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
formerly Praedicator. S. Marci 701 [Oct. 7, 1357, Ind. 11], 13-½ × 11,
ff. 492 (22), is m<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. in the Gospels, p<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. in Act., Paul., and b<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. in
Apoc. This splendid copy was purchased for the British Museum from
the heirs of Dr. Samuel Butler, Bishop of Lichfield. It contains the
whole New Testament; was first cited by Wetstein (107) from notices
by Jo. Lamy, in his <q>de Eruditione Apostolorum,</q> Florence, 1738;
glanced at by Birch, and stated by Scholz (N. T. vol. ii. pp. xii, xxviii)
to have been cursorily collated by himself: how that is possible can
hardly be understood, as he elsewhere professes his ignorance whither the
manuscript had gone (N. T. vol. i. p. lxxii). Scrivener collated the
whole volume. There are many changes by a later hand, also <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, κεφ.
<hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, some <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, and
some foreign matter.
</p>

<p>
202. Brit. Mus. Addit. 14,774, formerly Praed. S. Marci 705 [xii],
10 × 8, ff. 278 (21), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> (in red and gold), <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>
(the last often omitted), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> This splendid
copy cost the Museum £84 (Bloomfield).
</p>

<p>
203. Flor. Bibl. Nat. Convent. i. 10, 7, formerly Praed. S. Marci 707
[xv], 8-5/8 × 5-¾, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, is really in modern Greek. Birch cites it for John
vii. 53, but it ought to be expunged from the list.
</p>

<p>
204. (Act. 92, Paul. 105.) [xi or xiii], Bologna, Bibl. Univ. 2775,
formerly Bononiensis Canonicor. Regular. St. Salvador 640. After the
suppression of the house in 1867, it was moved to its present place.
7-¾ × 5-3/8, ff. 443 (25). <hi rend='italic'>Syn.</hi>, κεφ., ἀναγνώσματα numbered (without <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (Birch, Scholz, corrected by Burgon). Also τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ.
</p>

<p>
Codd. 205-215, 217 in the Ducal palace at Venice, were slightly
examined by Birch in 1783, carefully by Burgon in 1872, and by Gregory
in 1886.
</p>

<p>
205. (Act. 93, Paul. 106, Apoc. 88.) Venice, Mark 5 [xv], large fol.,
15-½ × 11, ff. 441 (55, 56), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> (Cath., Paul.), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ. (Gr. and Lat.),
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, contains both Testaments, with many peculiar readings. It
was written for Cardinal Bessarion (apparently by John Rhosen his
librarian), the donor of all these books. This is Dean Holmes' No. 68
in the Septuagint, and contains a note in the Cardinal's hand: τόπος μκ.
Ἡ θεία γραφὴ παλαιά τε καὶ νέα πᾶσα; κτῆμα Βησσαρίωνος Καρδηνάλεως Ἐπισκόπου
Οαβινων τοῦ (sic) καὶ Νικαίας. By τόπος μκ Holmes understands the
class mark of the volume in Bessarion's Library.  W. F. Rinck considers
it in the <hi rend='italic'>Gospels</hi> a copy of Cod. 209 (<q>Lucubratio Critica in Act. Apost.
Epp. C. et P.,</q> Basileae, 1830). Burgon, who fully admits their wonderful
similarity in respect to the text, judges that Cod. 205, which is much more
modern than Cod. 209, was transcribed from the same <emph>uncial</emph> archetype.
</p>

<p>
206. (Act. 94, Paul. 107, Apoc. 101.) Ven. Mark 6 [xv or xvi],
15 × 10-5/8, ff. 431, like Codd. 69 and 233, is partly on parchment, partly
on paper. It contains both Testaments, but is not numbered for the
Apocalypse. A mere duplicate of Cod. 205, as Holmes saw clearly: it is
his No. 122.
</p>

<p>
207. Ven. Mark 8 [xi or xii], 10-7/8 × 8-3/8, ff. 267 (22), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>,
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>) in gold, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> in
Matt. i. 1-13; Mark i. 1-11, for the sake of the gorgeous illuminations.
Written in two columns. Once owned by A. F. R.
</p>

<p>
208. Ven. Mark 9 [xi or xii], 7-1/8 × 5-¾, ff. 239 (23), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, of some value.
</p>

<p>
209. (Act. 95, Paul. 108, Apoc. 46.) Ven. Mark 10 [xi, xiv Greg.],
7-¾ × 4-¾, ff. 411 (27), of the whole New Testament, once Bessarion's,
who had it with him at the Council of Florence, 1439. There are
numerous minute marginal notes in vermilion, obviously <foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign>.
In its delicate style of writing this copy greatly resembles Cod. 1 (facsimile
No. <ref target='Plate_IX'>23</ref>). Κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), also the modern
chapters in the margin. <hi rend='italic'>Prol.</hi> to Epistles, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, but not much in the
Gospels, before each of which stands a blank leaf, as if for <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> A good
collation of Codd. 205 and 209 is needed; Birch did little, Engelbreth
gave him some readings, and Fleck has published part of a collation by
Heimbach. Rinck collated Apoc. i-iii. In the Gospels they are very
like Codd. B, 1. The Apocalypse is in a later hand, somewhat resembling
that of Cod. 205, and has <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> For the unusual order of the books, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi>
above, p. <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>.
</p>

<p>
210. Ven. Mark 27 [xi or xii], a noble fol., 14 × 11-7/8, ff. 372, with
a catena (Victor's commentary on St. Mark). <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 1-ii. 18,
from the same cause as in Cod. 207. Rich blue and gold illuminations,
and pictures of SS. Mark and Luke. Τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
211. Ven. Mark 539 [xii], fol., 11-½ × 9-½, ff. 280 (29-26), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
Luke i. 1-ii. 32; John i. 1-iv. 2, with an Arabic version in the right-hand
column of each page. Κεφ. t., Am., Eus. (irregularly inserted),
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, ῥήμ., στίχ.
</p>

<p>
Burgon cites Zanetti, Graeca D. Marc. Bibl. Codd. MSS., Venet. 1740,
p. 291, for the enumeration of the five Patriarchates (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> above, p. <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>),
and other curious matter appended to St. John. The heading of the
second Gospel is εὐαγγέλιον ἐκ τοῦ κατὰ Μάρκον.
</p>

<p>
212. Ven. Mark 540 [xi or xii], 6-7/8 × 5, ff. 273 (23), the first page in
gold, with <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> and most elaborate illuminations. Much <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, twenty
leaves being supplied in a modern hand. <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> with <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> in a line with them (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Cod. 112), a little later,
carried only to the end of St. Mark.
</p>

<p>
213. Ven. Mark 542 [xi], 8vo, 8-1/8 × 6-¼, ff. 356 (18), <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> John xviii.
40-xxi. 25. <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ. (<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> most irregularly inserted),
few ἀρχαί and τέλη, ἀναγν., heroic verses as colophons to the Gospels.
Large full stops are found in impossible places.
</p>

<p>
214. Ven. Mark 543 [xiv], 8vo, 9-¾ × 6-¼, ff. 227 (27), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>argent.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> with <hi rend='italic'>harm.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>
</p>

<p>
215. Ven. Mark 544 [xi], fol., 12-¾ × 9-½, ff. 271 (24), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> with <hi rend='italic'>harm.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (later).
This copy is a duplicate of Codd. 20, 300, as well in its text as in the
subscriptions and commentary, being without any of the later corrections
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
seen in Cod. 20. The commentary on St. John is Chrysostom's, those on
the other Gospels the same as in Cod. 300 (Burgon).
</p>

<p>
216. Codex Canonici, brought by him from Corcyra, written in a small
character [no date assigned], never was at St. Mark's, as Scholz alleges:
Griesbach inserted it in his list through a misunderstanding of Birch's
meaning. It is probably one of those now at Oxford, to be described
hereafter (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Codd. 489, 490).
</p>

<p>
217. Ven. Mark, Gr. i. 3, given in 1478 by Peter de Montagnana to
the monastery of St. John in Viridario, at Padua (viii. A.) [xii or xiii],
8-1/8 × 6-1/8, ff. 306 (21), in fine condition. <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), full <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, few <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>
Codd. 218-225 are in the Imperial Library at Vienna. Alter and
Birch collated them about the same time, the latter but cursorily, and
Gregory examined them in 1887.
</p>

<p>
*218. (Act. 65, Paul. 57, Apoc. 33.) Vindobon. Caesar, Nessel. 23,
formerly 1 [xiii], fol., 12-½ × 8-¾, ff. 623 (49, 50), 2 cols., κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Euthal.</hi> in Acts, Cath., Paul., contains both Testaments.
<hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Apoc. xiii. 5-xiv. 8; xv. 7-xvii. 2; xviii. 10-xix. 15; ending
at xx. 7 λυθήσεται. This important copy, containing many peculiar readings,
was described by Treschow, and comprises the text of Alter's
inconvenient, though fairly accurate N. T. 1786-7, to be described in
Vol. II. Like Cod. 123 it was brought from Constantinople by De
Busbeck.
</p>

<p>
219. Vind. Caes. Ness. 321, formerly 32 [xiii], 6-¼ × 4-¾, ff. 232 (21),
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>
</p>

<p>
220. Vind. Caes. Ness. 337, formerly 33 [xiv], 12mo, 3-7/8 × 2-5/8, ff.
303 (22), in very small letters, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>
</p>

<p>
221. Vind. Caes. Ness. 117, formerly 38 [x or xi], 11 × 7-5/8, ff. 251
(41-43), with commentaries (Chrysostom on Matt., John; Victor on
Mark, Titus of Bostra on Luke), to which the <emph>fragments</emph> of text here
given are accommodated.
</p>

<p>
222. Vind. Caes. Ness. 180, formerly 39 [xiv], 8-½ × 6, ff. 346 (32),
on cotton paper, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> Contains <emph>fragments</emph> of the Gospels, with a commentary
(Victor's on St. Mark). This and the last were brought from
Constantinople by De Busbeck.
</p>

<p>
223. Vind. Caes. 301, formerly 40 [xiv, Greg. x], 7 × 5-½, ff. 115 (32),
contains fragments of SS. Matthew, Luke, and John, with a catena. Codd.
221-3 must be cited cautiously: Alter appears to have made no systematic
use of them.
</p>

<p>
224. Vind. Caes. Suppl. Gr. 97, formerly Kollar. 8 [xii], 5-½ × 4-5/8,
ff. 97 (19), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, only contains
St. Matthew. This copy came from Naples.
</p>

<p>
225. Vind. Caes. Suppl. Gr. 102, formerly Kollar. 9 [dated ϛψ´ or
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1192], 5-3/8 × 3-7/8, ff. 171 (29), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀγαγν., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Codd. 226-233 are in the Escurial, described by D. G. Moldenhawer,
who collated them about 1783, loosely enough, for Birch's edition. In
1870 the Librarian, José Fernandez Montana (in order to correct Haenel's
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
errors) sent to Mr. Wm. Kelly, who obligingly communicated it to me,
a complete catalogue of the four copies of the Greek Bible, and of nineteen
of the New Testament <q>neither more or less,</q> then at the Escurial,
with their present class-marks. I do not recognize, either in his list or
in that subjoined, the <q>Codex Aureus containing the Four Gospels in
letters of gold, a work of the early part of the eleventh century,</q> spoken
of in the <hi rend='italic'>Globe</hi> newspaper of Oct. 3, 1872, on occasion of the fire at the
Escurial on Oct. 2, which however did not touch the manuscripts. Perhaps
that Codex is in Latin, unless it be Evst. 40. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> also Emmanuel
Miller, Cat. des MSS. Gr. de la Bibl. de l'Escurial, Paris, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1848.
</p>

<p>
226. (Act. 108, Paul. 228.) Cod. Escurialensis χ. iv. 17 [xi], 8vo, ff. ?,
on the finest vellum, richly ornamented, in a small, round, very neat
hand. <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> Many corrections
were made by a later hand, but the original text is valuable, and the
readings sometimes unique. Fairly collated.
</p>

<p>
227. Escurial. χ. iii. 15 [xiii], 4to, ff. 158, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
A later hand, which dates from 1308, has been very busy in making corrections.
</p>

<p>
228. (Act. 109, Paul. 229.) Escurial. χ. iv. 12 [xiv, Montana xvi],
8vo, ff. ?, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> Once belonged to Nicolas Nathanael of Crete, then to
Andreas Damarius of Epidaurus, a calligrapher. <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi><note place='foot'>Thus, at least, I understand Moldenhawer's description, <q>Evangeliis et Actis
λέξεις subjiciuntur dudum in vulgus notae.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
229. Escurial. χ. iv. 21 [dated 1140], 8vo, ff. 296, written by Basil
Argyropolus, a notary. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Mark xvi. 15-20; John i. 1-11. <hi rend='italic'>Pict.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>; the latter by a hand of about the fourteenth century, which
retraced much of the discoloured ink, and corrected in the margin (since
mutilated by the binder) very many important readings of the first hand,
which often resemble those of ADK. i. 72. This copy must be mislaid,
as it is not in Montana's list.
</p>

<p>
230. Escurial. φ (Montana ψ).<note place='foot'>Others F.</note> iii. 5 [dated Oct. 29, 1013, with the
wrong Indiction, 11 for 12: Montana's date is 1014, and the error is
probably not his: <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, note 2], 4to, ff. 218, written by Luke a monk
and priest, with double <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi><note place='foot'>By double <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> Moldenhawer may be supposed to mean here and in Cod. 232
both <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi></note>, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, ῥήμ, στίχ.: <hi rend='italic'>see</hi>
p. <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, note. An interesting copy, deemed by Moldenhawer worthy of
closer examination.
</p>

<p>
231. Escurial. φ (Montana ψ). iii. 6 [xii], 4to, ff. 181, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
torn, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, a picture <q>quae Marcum mentitur,</q> <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>
There are some marginal glosses by a later hand (which obelizes John
vii. 53 <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>), and a Latin version above parts of St. Matthew.
</p>

<p>
232. Escurial. φ (Montana ψ). iii. 7 [xiii: dated 1292, Montana],
4to, ff. 288, very elegant but otherwise a poor copy. Double <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, τίτλοι
in the margin of SS. Matthew and Luke, but elsewhere kept apart.
</p>

<p>
233. Escurial. Υ. ii. 8 [xi ?, Montana xiii], ff. 279, like Codd. 69 and
206, is partly of parchment, partly paper, in bad condition, and once
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
belonged to Matthew Dandolo, a Venetian noble. It has a catena, and
by reason of ligatures, &amp;c. (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>), is hard to read. <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi> (apart), <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, ῥήμ., στίχ.
</p>

<p>
234. (Act. 57, Paul. 72.) Cod. Havniensis reg. theol. 1322, formerly 1
[dated 1278], 10 × 7-3/8, ff. 315 (35), 2 cols., one of the several copies
written by Theodore (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, note 1). This copy and Cod. 235 are
now in the Royal Library at Copenhagen, but were bought at Venice by
G. Rostgaard in 1699. The order of the books in Cod. 234 is described
p. 73. <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, with many corrections. (C. G.
Hensler, 1784.)
</p>

<p>
235. Havniens. reg. theol. 1323, formerly 2 [dated 1314], 4to, ff.
279, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, written by the ἱερομόναχος Philotheus, though very incorrectly;
the text agrees much with Codd. DK. i. 33 and the Harkleian Syriac.
Κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>; the words are often ill divided and the stops misplaced
(Hensler).
</p>

<p>
236<note place='foot'>Readings extracted by Griesbach (Symb. Crit. i. pp. 247-304) from the margin
of a copy of Mill's Greek Testament in the Bodleian, in his own or Thomas
Hearne's handwriting, were placed here, but are omitted. Scrivener (Cod.
Augiensis, Introd. p. xxxvi) has shown that they were derived from Evan. 440.</note>. London, J. Bevan Braithwaite 3 [xi], 6-½ × 4-3/8, ff. 256 (20), <hi rend='italic'>7 chart.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, κεφ., some τίτλ., some <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> at
beginning and at end after John ix. 28. Beautifully written. Bought at
Athens in 1889. Collated by W. C. Braithwaite.
</p>

<p>
Codd. 237-259 are nearly all Moscow manuscripts, and were
thoroughly collated by C. F. Matthaei, for his N. T., to be described in
Vol. II. These Russian codices were for the most part brought from
the twenty-two monasteries of Mount Athos by the monk Arsenius,
on the suggestion of the Patriarch Nico, in the reign of Michael, son
of Alexius (1645-76), and placed in the Library of the Holy Synod, at
Moscow.
</p>

<p>
*237. Mosc. S. Synod 42 [x], fol., ff. 288, Matthaei's d, from Philotheus
(a monastery), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, with scholia, and Victor's commentary on St. Mark.
</p>

<p>
*238. Mosc. Syn. 48 (Mt. e) [xi], fol., ff. 355, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, with a catena and scholia; contains only SS. Matthew and Mark,
but is of good quality. This copy formed the basis of Matthaei's edition
of Victor's commentary on St. Mark, 1775 (Burgon).
</p>

<p>
*239. Mosc. Syn. 47 (Mt. g) [xi], fol., ff. 277, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> (Luke,
John), contains Mark xvi. 2-8; Luke; John to xxi. 23, with scholia.
</p>

<p>
*240. Mosc. Syn. 49 (Mt. i) [xii], fol., ff. 410, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, once belonging to
Philotheus, then to Dionysius (monasteries) on Athos, with the commentary
of Euthymius Zigabenus. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Mark viii. 12-34; xiv. 17-54;
Luke xv. 32-xvi. 8.
</p>

<p>
*241. Mosc. (Act. 104, Paul. 120, Apoc. 47) Dresdensis Reg. A. 172
(Tregelles), once Matthaei's (k) [xi], 4to, 8-7/8 × 6-¾, ff. 356 (31), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> (Gregory); Epp. <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, the whole
N. T. (p. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, note), beautifully written, with rare readings. Bought by
Alexius for fifty-two <foreign rend='italic'>aspri</foreign> at the siege of Constantinople (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1453), afterwards
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
given by Pachonius to a monastery at Athos, and thence called
δοχειαρίου.
</p>

<p>
*242. Mosc. (Act. 105, Paul. 121, Apoc. 48) Syn. 380 (Mt. l) [xii],
8vo, ff. 510, the whole N. T., with Psalms, ᾠδαί, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>
</p>

<p>
243. Mosc. Cod. Typographei S. Syn. 13 (Mt. m) [xiv], fol., <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>,
ff. 224, from the Iberian monastery on Athos, contains SS. Matthew and
Luke with Theophylact's commentary.
</p>

<p>
*244. Mosc. Typograph. 1 (Mt. n) [xii], fol., ff. 274, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, with
Euthymius Zigabenus' commentary.
</p>

<p>
*245. Mosc. Syn. 265, 278, formerly (Greg.) (Mt. o) [dated 1199], 4to,
ff. 246, from the famous monastery of Batopedion, written by John,
a priest.
</p>

<p>
*246. Mosc. Syn. 261 (Mt. p) [xiv], 4to, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, ff. 189, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
with marginal various readings. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. xii. 41-xiii. 55;
John xvii. 24-xviii. 20.
</p>

<p>
*247. Mosc. Syn. 373 (Mt. q) [xii], 8vo, ff. 223, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, from Philotheus.
</p>

<p>
*248. Mosc. Syn. 264 (Mt. r) [dated 1275], 4to, ff. 260 (8 <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> + 252),
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, written by Meletius a Beraean for Cyrus
Alypius, οἰκόνομος of St. George's monastery, in the reign of Michael
Palaeologus (1259-82).
</p>

<p>
*249. Mosc. Syn. 94 (Mt. s) [xi], fol., ff. 809 (more likely 309 as
Greg.), from Παντοκράτωρ monastery (as Cod. 74). Contains St. John
with a catena.
</p>

<p>
*250. Mosc. Syn. in a box (Mt. v) [xiii], small 8vo, ff. 225, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, is the cursive portion of Cod V (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi>
p. <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, and note), John vii. 39-xxi. 25. It is also Wetstein's Cod. 87.
</p>

<p>
*251. Mosc. Tabularii Caesarei (Mt. x) [xi], 4to, ff. 270, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, presented to a monastery in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1400.
</p>

<p>
*252. Dresd. Reg. A. 145 (Tregelles), once Matthaei's (z) [xi], 8-5/8 × 7,
ff. 123 (31), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν. (Greg.), with
corrections and double readings (as from another copy), but <foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
*253. Mosc. of Nicephorus Archbishop of Cherson <q>et Slabinii</q>
(Slaviansk ?)<note place='foot'>Holmes, Praefatio ad Pentateuchum, describes his Cod. 32 as <q>e Codicibus
Eugenii, olim Archiepiscopi Slabinii et Chersonis.</q> Nicephorus also is named
by Holmes as the editor of a Catena on the Octateuch and the four books of
Kings from the Constantinopolitan manuscripts (Leipzig, 1772-3), and is
described as <q>primo Hieromonachus, et postea Archiepiscopus Slabiniensis et
Chersonensis, sedem Astracani habens</q> (<hi rend='italic'>ubi supra</hi>, cap. <ref target='Chapter_IV'>iv</ref>).</note>, formerly belonged to the monastery of St. Michael at
Jerusalem (Mt. 10) [xi], fol., ff. 248, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, with
scholia, Victor's commentary on St. Mark, and rare readings, much
resembling those of Cod. 259.
</p>

<p>
*254. Dresd. A. 100 (Matthaei 11) (Tregelles) [xi], 11-5/8 × 9-1/8,
ff. 247 (24), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, from the monastery of St.
Athanasius. Contains SS. Luke and John with scholia.
</p>

<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>

<p>
*255. Mosc. Syn. 139 (Mt. 12) [xiii], fol., ff. 299 <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> +9, once
<q>Dionysii monachi rhetoris <emph>et amicorum</emph>.</q> Commentaries of Chrysostom
and others (ἐξηγητικαὶ ἐκλογαί), with fragments of the text interspersed.
</p>

<p>
*256. Mosc. Typogr. Syn. 3 (Mt. 14) [ix ?], fol., ff. 147, scholia on
SS. Mark and Luke, with portions of the text. The commentary on
St. Mark is <emph>ascribed</emph> to Victor, but in this copy and the preceding the
scholia are but few in number (Burgon).
</p>

<p>
*257. Mosc. Syn. 120 (Mt. 15) is Evan. O, described above.
</p>

<p>
*258. Dresd. Reg. A. 123 (Tregelles), (Mt. 17) [xiii], 8-½ × 6-½, ff. 126,
barbarously written; <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>
</p>

<p>
*259. Mosc. Syn. 45 (Mt. a) [xi], fol., ff. 263, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, from the Iberian monastery, with a commentary
(Victor's on St. Mark). This is one of Matthaei's best manuscripts.
His other twenty-two copies contain portions of Chrysostom,
and therefore come under the head of Patristic Quotations.
</p>

<p>
Codd. 260-469 were added to the list by Scholz: the very few he
professes to have collated thoroughly will be distinguished by an
asterisk.
</p>

<p>
260. Paris National. Gr. 51 [xiii], 12 × 8-¾, ff. 241 (24), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>argent.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, once (like Cod, 309) <q>domini du
Fresne</q>; correctly written.
</p>

<p>
261. Par. Nat. Gr. 52 [xiv], 11 × 8-7/8, ff. 175, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν. (<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. later), once at the monastery of the Forerunner
at Constantinople. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Luke xxiv. 39-53. Matt. i. 1-xi. 1 supplied
[xiv] <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
</p>

<p>
*262. Par. Nat. Gr. 53 [x], 12-¾ × 9-7/8, ff. 212 (27), 2 cols., κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
some τίτλ. (<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>harm.</hi> at bottom of page, except in Luke, John,
where too <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> is later), <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, with rare readings, like those of Evan. Λ
and Evann. 300, 376, 428.
</p>

<p>
263. (Act. 117, Paul. 137.) Par. Nat. Gr. 61 [xiii], 8-¼ × 6-1/8 ff. 294
(28, 29), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. Probably from
Asia Minor. It once belonged to Jo. Hurault Boistaller, as did Codd.
301, 306, 314.
</p>

<p>
264. Par. Nat. Gr. 65 [xiii], 4to, 8 × 5-3/8, ff. 287 (20), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ.,
κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>harm.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, with what have been called
Coptic-like letters, but brought from the East in 1718 by Paul Lucas.
The leaves are misplaced in binding, as are those of Cod. 272. At
the foot of every page is a harmony like those in Codd. E, W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi>
p. <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, note 2 (Burgon).
</p>

<p>
Of these copies, 265-270, Burgon states that the grand 4to Cod. 265
seems to contain an important text, 270 a peculiar text, though less
beautiful externally than 266, 267, 269. Cod. 268 in double columns
has <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi> very superb, but <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> of Evangelists only sketched in ink.
Cod. 269, once belonging to Henry IV (in which the last leaf of St. Luke
is missing), is in its ancient binding, and is full of very uncommon representations
of Gospel incidents.
</p>

<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>

<p>
265. Par. Nat. Gr. 66 [x], 9-7/8 × 7-½, ff. 372, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, once belonged to Philibert de la Mare.
</p>

<p>
266. Par. Nat. Gr. 67 [x], 9-½ × 6-½, ff. 282 (23), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>
</p>

<p>
267. Par. Nat. Gr. 69 [x], 8 × 6-1/8, ff. 396 (19), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>
in same line, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 1-8; Mark i. 1-7;
Luke i. 1-8; xxiv. 50-John i. 12.
</p>

<p>
268. Par. Nat. Gr. 73 [xii], 9-¾ × 7-¾, ff. 217 (25), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
269. Par. Nat. Gr. 74 [xi], 9-¼ × 7-¾, ff. 215 (28), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi> (later).
</p>

<p>
270. Par. Nat. Gr. 75 [xi], 7-¼ × 5-¼, ff. 346 (19), κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, with a mixed text.
</p>

<p>
271. Par. Nat. Gr. Suppl. Gr. 75 [xii], 8vo, 7-3/8 × 5-¼, ff. 252 (22),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
272. Brit. Mus. Addit. 15,581 [xii], 5-½ × 4-¾, ff. 218 (21), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
few τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> (mostly omitted). Once Melchisedek Thevenot's.
Gregory traces it through the Paris Nat. Library and Th. Rodd to the
Brit. Museum, which purchased it.
</p>

<p>
273. Par. Nat. Gr. 79, 4to, 8-5/8 × 6-¼, ff. 201 (29-31), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> with <hi rend='italic'>harm.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, and
<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> again in the later hand, on vellum [xii], but partly on cotton
paper [xiv] contains also some scholia, extracts from Severianus' commentary,
annals of the Gospels, a list of the Gospel parables, with a mixed
text.
</p>

<p>
274. Par. Nat. Gr. Suppl. Gr. 79 [x], 9-3/8 × 6-½, ff. 232 (26), κεφ., τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, once belonged to Maximus Panagiotes, <foreign rend='italic'>protocanon</foreign>
of the Church at Callipolis (there were many places of this name: but
<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 346). <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> (but supplied in a later hand) Mark i. 1-17; vi.
21-54; John i. 1-20; iii. 18-iv. 1; vii. 23-42; ix. 10-27; xviii.
12-29. Dean Burgon had a photograph of this manuscript, which he
regarded as a specimen of the transition period between uncial and cursive
writing. The subscription, resembling that of Cod. L, set in the margin
of Cod. 274, he judges to look as old as that of L: <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Chapter IX, Mark
xvi. 9-20.
</p>

<p>
275. Par. Nat. Gr. 80 [xi], 10-1/8 × 8-1/8, ff. 230 (24), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>argent.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, antea Memmianus.
</p>

<p>
276. Par. Nat. Gr. 81 [a.d. 1092], 7-7/8 × 5-¾, ff. 307, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, written by Nicephorus of the
monastery Meletius.
</p>

<p>
277. Par. Nat. Gr. 81 A [xi], 6-¾ × 5-1/8, ff. 261, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. (ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> later).
</p>

<p>
278. Par. Nat. Gr. 82 [xii, Greg. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1072], 8 × 5-7/8, ff. 305 (21), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, once Mazarin's,
with Armenian inscriptions. Matt. xiii. 43-xvii. 5 is in a later
hand.
</p>

<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>

<p>
279. Par. Nat. Gr. 86 [xii], 7 × 5-3/8, ff. 250, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>; this copy and Cod. 294 were brought from Patmos
and given to Louis XIV in 1686 by Joseph Georgirenus, Archbishop of
Samos.
</p>

<p>
280. Par. Nat. Gr. 87 [xii], 7-3/8 × 5-½, ff. 177 (25, 26), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Mark viii. 3-xv. 36.
</p>

<p>
281. Par. Nat. Gr. 88 [xii], 8-3/8 × 6-1/8, ff. 249 (22, 23), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> later). <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. xxviii. 11-20; Luke i. 1-9.
Given to the Monastery <q>Deiparae Hieracis</q> by the eremite monk
Meletius.
</p>

<p>
282. Par. Nat. Gr. 90 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1176], 7 × 5, ff. 150 (33), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>argent.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> later).
</p>

<p>
283. Par. Nat. Gr. 92 [xiv], 7-½ x 5, ff. 159 (32), κεφ., τίτλ.
</p>

<p>
284. Par. Nat. Gr. 93 [xiii], 7-5/8 × 5-7/8, ff. 254 (22), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>argent.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., some <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> Once Teller's of
Rheims and Peter Stella's.
</p>

<p>
285. Par. Nat. Gr. 95, olim 2865/3 [xiv], 7-¾ × 5-3/8, ff. 246 (22), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, once Teller's (58): given by Augustin Justinian to
Jo. Maria of Catana. This codex is Kuster's Paris 1 and Wetstein's 10.
See Evan. 10.
</p>

<p>
286. Par. Nat. Gr. 96 [April 12, 1432, Indiction 10], 8-½ × 5-½; by the
monk Calistus, with the Paschal canon for the years 1432-1502. Ff. 264
(21), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>
</p>

<p>
287. Par. Nat. Gr. 98 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1478], 9-3/8 × 5-½, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, ff. 322 (18), κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> Written by Hermonymus (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 70), with a most
interesting personal memorandum by its original owner D. Chambellan,
and a portrait of his betrothed, 1479. Burgon, <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, Jan.
22, 1873.
</p>

<p>
288. According to Dr. C. R. Gregory, the following three fragments
are parts of the same MS.&mdash;
</p>

<p>
(1) Oxf. Bodl. Canon. Gr. 33 (Scriv. Ed. iii. Evan. 487), St. Matthew;
once belonged to Antony Dizomaeus.
</p>

<p>
(2) Par. Nat. Gr. 99, once German Brixius'. St. Luke.
</p>

<p>
(3) Par. Institut. III in Quarto (Scriv. Ed. iii. Evan. 471), St. John.
On the first page is written <q>C. Emmerei Sanguntiniani, emptus 40
assibus.</q> M. Tardieu, the librarian, informed Dean Burgon that it came
from the City Library, to which it was bequeathed by <q>M. Morrian,
procureur du roi et de la ville de Paris.</q>
</p>

<p>
[xv], 9-½ × 6-¼, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, ff. 90 + 93 + 67 (18), κεφ. (Gr. et Lat.), τίτλ.
(κεφ. Lat. only in Luke): written by George Hermonymus. (F. Madan
from Omont, Bulletin de la société de l'histoire, Paris, tome xii, 1885,
and Gregory.)
</p>

<p>
289. Par. Nat. Gr. 100 A [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> Feb. 15, 1625], <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, ff. 336, capp.
Lat., written by Lucas ἀρχιθύτης.
</p>

<p>
290. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 108 a [xiii], 8-5/8 × 5-¾, chart., ff. 259 (22),
<hi rend='italic'>argent.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> with <hi rend='italic'>harm.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, from
the Sorbonne.
</p>

<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>

<p>
291. Par. Nat. Gr. 113 [xii], 8-5/8 × 5-1/8, ff. 290 (20), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>argent.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., belonged to one Nicolas.
</p>

<p>
292. Par. Nat. Gr. 114 [xi], 7-¼ × 4-3/8, ff. 290, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> (later), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 1-vii. 14; John xix. 14-xxi. 25.
</p>

<p>
293. Par. Nat. Gr. 117 [Nov. 1262], 5-3/8 × 3-1/8, ff. 340 (20), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>argent.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, written by Manuel
for Blasius a monk.
</p>

<p>
294. Par. Nat. Gr. 118 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1291], ff. 238, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 18-xii. 25. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Evan. 279.
</p>

<p>
295. Par. Nat. Gr. 120 [xiii], 4-½ × 2-¾, ff. 239, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 1-11.
</p>

<p>
296. (Act. 124, Paul. 49, Apoc. 57.) Par. Nat. Gr. 123 and 124 [xvi],
4-7/8 × 3-½, ff. 257 and 303 (20), <hi rend='italic'>capp. Lat.</hi>, written by Angelus Vergecius
(<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, note 1).
</p>

<p>
297. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 140 [xii], 5-3/8 × 3-½, ff. 196, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, some <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>
</p>

<p>
298. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 175 [xii], 7-½ × 5-½, ff. 222 (27), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, from the Jesuits' Public Library,
Lyons.
</p>

<p>
*299. Par. Nat. Gr. 177 [xi], 10-7/8 × 8-¼, ff. 328 (24), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, an accurately written
copy with a mixed text, Victor's commentary on St. Mark, and scholia
which seem to have been written in Syria by a partisan of Theodore of
Mopsuestia: and other fragments.
</p>

<p>
*300. Par. Nat. Gr. 186 [xi], 13 × 9-1/8, ff. 209 (36), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, more roughly written than the sister-copy,
Evan. 20, <q>olim Fonte-Blandensis</q> (Fontainbleau), contains the first
three Gospels, with subscriptions like that of Cod. 262. Contains catena,
<q>πάρεργα de locis selectis,</q> and in the outer margin commentaries in a
later hand, Chrysostom's on St. Matthew, Victor's or Cyril's of Alexandria
on St. Mark (Evann. 20, 300 mention both names), and that of Titus of
Bostra on St. Luke. See Evan. 428, and especially Evan. 215. Collated
by Scholz and W. F. Rose.
</p>

<p>
301. Par. Nat. Gr. 187 [xi], 13-3/8 × 10-½, ff. 221 (22), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., once Boistaller's, a mixed text with a catena (Victor on St.
Mark).
</p>

<p>
302. Par. Nat. Gr. 193 [xvi], <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, ff. 172, once Mazarin's: contains
fragments of SS. Matthew and Luke with a commentary. Poor.
</p>

<p>
303. Par. Nat. Gr. 194 A [xi], 11-½ × 9-1/8, ff. 321 (33), <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> (later),
contains vellum fragments of John i-iv; and on cotton paper, dated
1255. Theophylact's commentary, and some iambic verses written by
Nicander, a monk.
</p>

<p>
304. Par. Nat. Gr. 194 [xiii], 10-7/8 × 8-½, ff. 242 (31-33), once Teller's;
contains SS. Matthew and Mark with a catena, that of St. Mark possibly
a modification of Victor's (Burgon).
</p>

<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>

<p>
305. Par. Nat. Gr. 195 [xiii], 12-¼ × 9, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, ff. 261 (51, 54), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>
all together, κεφ., τίτλ. (<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> later), once Mazarin's. Burgon states
that this copy contains nothing but the commentary of Euthymius
Zigabenus.
</p>

<p>
306. Par. Nat. Gr. 197 [xii], 11 × 8, ff. 559 (25), <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> John xxi. 1-8,
24, 25, once Boistaller's, contains SS. Matthew and John with Theophylact's
commentary.
</p>

<p>
307. Par. Nat. Gr. 199 [xi], 11-3/8 × 8-¾, ff. 306 (30), <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, contains only
Chrysostom's Homilies on SS. Matthew and John (Burgon).
</p>

<p>
308. Par. Nat. Gr. 200 [xii], 11 × 8-7/8, ff. 187 (27), once Mazarin's;
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, contains the same as Cod. 307.
</p>

<p>
309. Par. Nat. Gr. 201 [x-xii], 10-¼ × 7-¾, ff. 303 (37), <q>very peculiar
in its style and beautifully written,</q> <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, once Du Fresne's, has SS.
Matthew and John with Chrysostom's commentary, Luke with that of
Titus of Bostra, Mark with Victor's. <q>This is not properly a text of the
Gospel: but parts of the text (κείμενον) interwoven with the commentary
(ἑρμήνεια)</q> (Burgon, Last Twelve Verses, pp. 282, 287).
</p>

<p>
310. Par. Nat. Gr. 202 [xi], 12-1/8 × 8-1/8, ff. 378 (27), has St. Matthew
with a catena, once Colbert's (as also were Evann. 267, 273, 279, 281-3,
286-8, 291, 294, 296, 315, 318-9). Formerly given to St. Saba's
monastery by its Provost Arsenius.
</p>

<p>
311. Par. Nat. Gr. 203 [xii], 14 × 11-½, ff. 357 (28), once Mazarin's;
this also has St. Matthew with a catena.
</p>

<p>
312. Par. Nat. Gr. 206 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1308], 10-¼ × 8, ff. 87 (30), Victor's
commentary without the text, like that in Cod. 20, which (and Cod. 300)
it closely resembles (Burgon, <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> p. 279, note).
</p>

<p>
313. Par. Nat. Gr. 208 [xiv or xv], 12 × 8-¼, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, ff. 460, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, once
Mazarin's; contains St. Luke with a catena.
</p>

<p>
314. Par. Nat. Gr. 209 [x-xii], 11 × 8, ff. 349 (32), once Boistaller's,
contains St. John with a remarkable catena (quite different from that
published by Cramer), with the names of the several authors (Burgon).
</p>

<p>
315. Par. Nat. Gr. 210 [xiii], 10-7/8 x 7-3/8, ff. 156, has the same contents
as Cod. 314. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> John i. 1-21; xiv. 25-xv. 16; xxi. 22-25.
</p>

<p>
316. Par. Nat. Gr. 211 [xii], 13-3/8 × 8-5/8, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, ff. 129 (33), κεφ., τίτλ.,
brought from Constantinople. Contains SS. John and Luke with a
commentary.
</p>

<p>
317. Par. Nat. Gr. 212 [xii], 12-¾ × 9-¼, ff. 352 (29), <q>olim Medicaeus</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, note 2), contains John x. 9-xxi. 25 with a catena.
</p>

<p>
318. Par. Nat. Gr. 213 [xiv], 13-3/8 × 9-3/8, ff. 16, 2 cols., has John vii. 1-xxi.
25 with a commentary.
</p>

<p>
319. Par. Nat. Gr. 231 [xii], 8-¼ × 6-¼, ff. 203 (33), with a commentary,
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
</p>

<p>
320. Par. Nat. Gr. 232 [xi], 9 × 7-¼, ff. 392 (21), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., has
St. Luke with a commentary.
</p>

<p>
321, 322 are Evst. 101 and 14 (Burgon, Greg.). Instead of these&mdash;
</p>

<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>

<p>
321. Brit. Mus. Addit. 34,107 [xi-xii], 5-¼ × 4-¼, ff. 213 (21-24), <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at
beginning (five leaves); κεφ., κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> Very minute. Purchased of
H. L. Dupuis, Esq., in 1891.
</p>

<p>
322. Brit. Mus. Addit. 34,108 [xiii], 8-½ × 6-½, ff. 175 (28), (148 <hi rend='italic'>membr.</hi>
+ 17 <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> Seventeen leaves of paper are added at the end
containing Luke iv. 3-viii. 19, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> [xv]. The writing is clear
and firm, injured in part. Belonged to monastery of Ῥενδήνη: purchased
of H. L. Dupuis in 1891.
</p>

<p>
323. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 118 [xv or xvi], 8-¼ × 5-5/8, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, ff. 94,
contains Matt. vi, vii, and a Greek version of some Arabic fables.
</p>

<p>
324. (Evst. 97, Apost. 32.) Par. Nat. Gr. 376 [xiii or xiv], 7-3/8 × 5,
ff. 315 (29), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>
later), once Mazarin's, together with lessons from the Acts, Epistles, and
Gospels, contains also Gospels complete (on cotton paper), and a list of
Emperors from Constantine to Manuel Porphyrogenitus (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1143).
</p>

<p>
325. Instead of 325 (Ed. 3), which is Evst. 99&mdash;
</p>

<p>
Brit. Mus. Addit. 32,341 [xi], 7-¾ × 6, ff. 222 (23), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. vi. 56-vii. 17; Luke xi.
17-32; xxiv. 26-John i. 22; end of <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> worn and faded. Purchased
of the Rev. G. J. Chester in 1884.
</p>

<p>
326. Par. Nat. Gr. 378 [xiv], <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, ff. 255, contains commentaries
(ἑρμήνεια) on certain ecclesiastical lessons or texts (τὸ κείμενον). This is
not a manuscript of the Gospels, properly so called.
</p>

<p>
327 and 328 are Evst. 99 and 100 (Burg. Greg.). Instead&mdash;
</p>

<p>
327. London, J. Bevan Braithwaite 1 [xii], 8 × 7, ff. 98 (21), τίτλ., κεφ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> beg. and end. Contains St. Mark
and St. Luke. Bought at Athens in 1884 with the next. (Collated, as
also the next, by W. C. Braithwaite.) (Greg. 531.)
</p>

<p>
328. J. Bevan Braithwaite 2 [xiii-xiv], 4-3/8 × 3, 2 vols., ff. 97+113 =
210 (29), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 1-12. Well written. (Greg. 573.)
</p>

<p>
329. Par. Nat. Coisl. Gr. 19 [xi], 12-¾ × 9-¼, ff. 321 (25), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> (John),
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> (Luke), στίχ. (Luke, John), with a commentary (Victor's on St.
Mark). Described (as is also Cod. 331) by Montfaucon.
</p>

<p>
330. (Act. 132, Paul. 131.) Formerly Petrop. Muralt. 101-xi. 1, 2,
330. (8 pe.) Coislin. 196 [xi], 9 × 7, ff. 289 (30), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Euthal.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> (Paul.), from Athanasius at Athos.
</p>

<p>
331. Par. Nat. Coisl. Gr. 197 [x-xii], 9-½ × 7, ff. 275 (20), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, once Hector D'Ailli's, Bishop of Toul.
</p>

<p>
332. Taurinensis Univ. C. ii. 4 (20) [xi], at Turin, 12-1/8 × 9-1/8, ff. 304
(33), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, with a commentary (Victor's on St. Mark).
Bound in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1258. Burgon cites Pasinus' Catalogue, P. i. p. 91.
</p>

<p>
333. Taurin. B. i. 9 (4) [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1214], 13-5/8 × 10-¼, ff. 377, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, once
belonged to Arsenius, Abp. of Monembasia in the Morea, then to
Gabriel, metropolitan of Philadelphia; SS. Matthew and John with
Nicetas' catena.
</p>

<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>

<p>
334. Taurin. B. iii. 8 (43) [xiv], 11-¼ × 8-½, ff. 267, SS. Matthew and
Mark with a commentary; <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ.
</p>

<p>
335. Taurin. B. iii. 2 (44) [xvi], <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 11-½ × 8-1/8, ff. 110 (29), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>argent.</hi>, στίχ. (Matt.).
</p>

<p>
336. Taurin. B. ii. 17 (101) [xvi], <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 11-¾ × 8-3/8, ff. 191+, St. Luke
with a catena.
</p>

<p>
337. Taurin. B. iii. 25 (52) [xii], 11-½ × 8-7/8, ff. 114 (28), 2 cols., parts
of St. Matthew with a commentary.
</p>

<p>
338. Taurin. B. vii. 33 (335) [xii], 5-½ × 4-¼, ff. 362 (18), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
339. (Act. 135, Paul. 170, Apoc. 83.) Taurin. B. v. 8 (302) [xiii], 8-½
× 6-1/8, ff. 200, 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Euthal.</hi> (Act., Cath., Paul.), and other matter<note place='foot'>Written in three several and minute hands (Hort):&mdash;A for the Gospels, the
Epistle of Pilate and its Answer, and a treatise on the genealogy of the Virgin;
B for the Apocalypse and a Synaxarion; C the Acts, Cath. Paul. (Hebrews last),
and Lives of the Apostles, followed on the same page by the Psalter by B, so
that Apoc. and <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> probably stood last.</note>.
</p>

<p>
340. Taurin. B. vii. 16 (344) [xiv], 5-¾ × 4-1/8, ff. 243 (21), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> (κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> later), with later corrections.
</p>

<p>
341. Taurin. B. vii. 14 (350) [dated 1296], 6 × 4-¾, ff. 268 (24), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> Written by Nicetas Mauron, a reader.
</p>

<p>
342. Taurin. B. v. 24 (149) [xiii], 8 × 6-1/8, ff. 300 (21), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
343. Mediolani Ambrosianus H. 13 Sup. [xi or xii], 7 × 4-¾, ff. 263,
<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (later), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> Written by
Antony, a priest, on Sunday, Sept. 1, of the third Indiction, which in the
twelfth century, might be <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1140 or 1185. Seen by Burgon.
</p>

<p>
344. Med. Ambros. G. 16 Sup. [x-xii], 6-3/8 × 4-¾, ff. 327 (19), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>
(later), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> later), <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> John
xxi. 12-25. But Luke xiii. 21-xvi. 23; xxi. 12[?]; xxii. 12-23;
xxiii. 45-John xxi. 25 are [xiv] <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> First page of St. Matthew, and
several of the early pages of St. Luke, have been re-written over the
original text. (Burgon.)
</p>

<p>
345. Med. Ambros. 17 Sup. [xi or xii], 5-¾ × 4-½, ff. 375 (15), 2 cols.,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, ῥήμ., στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (John), (<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> later). <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 1-11.
</p>

<p>
*346. Med. Ambros. S. 23 Sup. [xii], 8-¾ × 6-½, ff. 168, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, ῥήμ., στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, carelessly written, with
very unusual readings<note place='foot'>This manuscript appears to be the only Greek witness for the Old Latin and
Curetonian Syriac variation Matt. i. 16 ἰωσὴφ ᾧ μνηστευθῆσα παρθένος μαριὰμ
ἐγέννησεν <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ιν</hi> τὸν λεγόμενον <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>χν</hi>. But then it was written in Italy, as Ceriani judges.</note>. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> John iii. 26-vii. 52. Bought in 1606 at
Gallipoli. Collated by Ceriani for Professor Ferrar, by Burgon and Rose
from Luke xxi. 37-xxiv. 53. Last of Abbott's four (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 13).
He gives a facsimile of Luke xi. 49-51.
</p>

<p>
347. Med. Ambros. 35 Sup. [xii], 9 × 6-½, ff. 245 (15), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>,
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, correctly written by Constantine
Chrysographus.
</p>

<p>
348. Med. Ambros. B. 56 Sup. [Dec. 29, 1022], 7-¾ × 5-7/8, ff. 187,
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, once
<q>J. V. Pinelli.</q> Citations from the O. T. are asterisked. Burgon had a
photograph.
</p>

<p>
349. Med. Ambros. F. 61 Sup. [1322], <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 8-7/8 × 5-7/8, ff. 399, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, bought at Corfu.
</p>

<p>
350. Med. Ambros. B. 62 Sup. [xi], 7-7/8 × 6-¼, ff. 305 (21), κεφ., τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> later). The first four leaves [xvi], <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> John xxi. 9-25.
</p>

<p>
351. Med. Ambros. B. 70 Sup. [xi or xii], 8-½ × 6, ff. 268 (22), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, with a Latin version [xv] here and
there written above the text <q>school-boy fashion.</q> Burgon.
</p>

<p>
352. Med. Ambros. B. 93 Sup. [xii], 9-¾ × 7-3/8, ff. 219 (20), κεφ., τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (later), brought from Calabria, 1607. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 1-17; Mark
i. 1-15; xvi. 13-20; Luke i. 1-7; xxiv. 43-53; John i. 1-10; xxi.
3-25. <hi rend='italic'>Lect.</hi> in margin, and the faded ink retouched [xiv].
</p>

<p>
353. Med. Ambros. M. 93 Sup. [xiii], 11-1/8 × 6-1/8, ff. 194 (23), κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (in latter parts, later), with the same commentary
as Evan. 181. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> John xxi. 24, 25.
</p>

<p>
354. Venetiis Marcianus 29 [xi], ff. 9-3/8 × 6-¼, ff. 442 (22), Matt. with
Theophylact; ch. xxviii is wanting. Written in a very large hand, and
bought at Constantinople in 1419 (Burgon, <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, Oct. 29, 1873).
</p>

<p>
355. Ven. Marc. 541 [xi ?], 6-½ × 4-7/8, ff. 410 (18), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (later), <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> (later still), a sumptuous and
peculiar copy.
</p>

<p>
356. Ven. Marc. 545 [xvi], <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 8-7/8 × 6-¼, ff. 176 (21), with Titus of
Bostra's catena on St. Luke. A note runs thus: Ἀντωνίου τοῦ Ἀγγελίου
καὶ χρήσει καὶ κτήσει, pro quo solvit librario qui descripserat HS. cxxvi.
l. Δ᾽. 3.
</p>

<p>
357. Ven. Marc. 28 [xi], 12-½ × 8-½, ff. 281 (35), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> (rather later),
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, SS. Luke and John with a catena. The titles resemble
those of Evan. 69.
</p>

<p>
358. Mutinensis ii. A. 9 [xiv], 6 × 4-7/8, ff. ?, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (later), <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, at Modena, in a small hand with rude
illuminations.
</p>

<p>
359. Mutin. [242], iii. B. 16 [xiv], 7-¼ × 4-7/8, ff. ?, with slight decorations,
on brownish paper, having scribe's name on last page. <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> (later), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>
</p>

<p>
360. Parmae reg. 2319 [xi], 7-3/8 × 6-1/8, ff. ?, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (later), <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> later still), with an unusual text, in
double columns, collated by De Rossi, who once possessed this codex and&mdash;
</p>

<p>
361. Parmae reg. 1821 [xiii], 4-¼ × 3-1/8, ff. ?, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> with <hi rend='italic'>harm.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>,
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, faded.  <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Luke viii. 14-xi. 20.
Fully described (as also Cod. 360) in De Rossi's printed Catalogue.
</p>

<p>
362. Florentiae Laurentianus Conv. Soppr. 176, formerly Cod. Biblioth.
S. Mariae No. 74 [xiii], 13-1/8 × 9-¼, ff. 314 (32), Luke vi. 29-xii. 10,
with a fuller catena than Cramer's, citing the names of Greek expositors.
Text in vermilion, commentary in black (Burgon). Described, like
Evann. 201, 370, by Jo. Lamy, <q>De eruditione Apostolorum,</q> Florent.
1738, p. 239.
</p>

<p>
363. (Act. 144, Paul. 180.) Flor. Laur. vi. 13 [xiii], a beautiful small
4to, 8-¼ × 5-5/8, ff. 306 (32), <hi rend='italic'>argent.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> with <hi rend='italic'>harm.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>,
στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Euthal.</hi> (Paul., Cath.).
</p>

<p>
364. Flor. Laur. vi. 24 [xiii, Greg. x], 8vo, 5-3/8 × 4, ff. 224 (20), ἀναγν.
(κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> only in Matt., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> later), (<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> xv), the
style of the characters rather peculiar, without the usual breaks between
the Gospels; some leaves at the beginning and end [xiv].
</p>

<p>
365. (Act. 145, Paul. 181.) Flor. Laur. vi. 36 [xiii], 4to, 7-½ x 5-3/8,
ff. 358 (33), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, contains also the Psalms.
Scholz collated it in select passages. See Gregory, who saw it.
</p>

<p>
366. Flor. Laur. Conv. Soppr. 171 (St. Maria's No. 20), [xii], a
grand fol., 11-½ × 8-7/8, ff. 323 (31), κεφ., τίτλ., with <hi rend='italic'>harm.</hi>, St. Matthew
in vermilion with catena in black. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> ch. i. 1-ii. 16, with many later
marginal notes. Entirely dissimilar in style from Cod. 362.
</p>

<p>
367. (Act. 146, Paul. 182, Apoc. 23.) Flor. Laur. Conv. Soppr. 53 (St.
Maria's No. 6) [dated 26 Decembr. 1332], 4to, chart., 9-¾ × 7, ff. 349 (32),
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, written
by one Mark. Bought in 1482 for three aurei by the Benedictines of
St. Maria (Burgon).
</p>

<p>
368. (Act. 150, Apoc. 84.) Flor. Riccardianus 84, in the Libreria
Riccardi, <q>olim Cosmae Oricellarii <emph>et amicorum</emph></q> (Evan. 255) [xv], 8vo,
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 6-1/8 × 4-1/8, ff. 124 (21), contains St. John's Gospel, the Apocalypse,
the Epistles and lessons from them, with Plato's Epistles, carelessly written.
</p>

<p>
369. Flor. Ricc. 90 [xii or xiv], 4to, 5-3/8 × 4-¼, ff. 23 + (25), κεφ., τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, contains Mark vi. 25-ix. 45; x. 17-xvi. 9, with part
of a Greek Grammar and <q>Avieni Fabulae.</q> The text is much
rubricated.
</p>

<p>
370. Flor. Ricc. 5 [xiv], fol., <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 10-7/8 × 7-¾, ff. 424, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, with Theophylact's commentary. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 1-iv. 17; John
xvi. 29-xxi. 25. Described by Lamy, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 362.
</p>

<p>
371. Rom. Vatican. Gr. 1159 [x], 4to, 8 × 6-½, ff. 315 (21), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
372. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1161 [xv], 4to, 9-½ × 6-½, ff. 199 (30), <hi rend='italic'>capp. Lat.</hi>,
ends John iii. 1. Beautifully written.
</p>

<p>
373. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1423 [xv], fol., <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 16-1/8 × 11, ff. 221 (46), <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <q>olim Cardinalis Sirleti,</q> with a catena, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> in fine.
G. Sirlet [1514-85] became Librarian of the Vatican 1573.
</p>

<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>

<p>
374. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1445 [xii], fol., 11-½ × 8-3/8, ff. 173 (45), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (κεφ.
<hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ. later), with a commentary ascribed to Peter of Laodicea,
who is also named on the fly-leaf of Cod. 138. Burgon, however,
says, <q>This is simply a mistake. No such work exists: and the commentary
on the second Evangelist is that of Victor,</q> <hi rend='italic'>ubi supra</hi>, p. <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>.
In 1221 one John procured it from Theodosiopolis; there were at least
five cities of that name, three of them in Asia Minor.
</p>

<p>
375. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1533 [xii], 6-¾ × 5-½, ff. 199 (26), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
376. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1539 [xi], 4-¼ × 3, ff. 185 (28), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, given by Francis Accidas. With subscriptions resembling
those of Codd. Λ, 262, 300 (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> pp. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, and note).
</p>

<p>
377. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1618 [xv], <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 12 × 8-¼, ff. 339 (30), St. Matthew
with a catena, the other Gospels with questions and answers.
</p>

<p>
378. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1658 [xiv], 12-1/8 x 8-5/8, ff. ?, portions from St.
Matthew with Chrysostom's Homilies, and from the prophets.
</p>

<p>
379. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1769 [xv], <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 11-5/8 × 8, ff. 437 (27), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., with a commentary.
</p>

<p>
380. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2139 [xv], <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 9-1/8 × 6, ff. 202 (23), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>capp. Lat.</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>
</p>

<p>
381. Rom. Palatino-Vat. Gr. 20 [xiv], <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 12-¼ × 9-7/8, ff. 226 (33),
St. Luke with a catena.
</p>

<p>
382. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2070 [xiii], 8-½ × 7-¼, ff. 167 (24), 2 cols., κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ.; <q>olim Basil.,</q> carelessly written, fragments
of SS. John and Luke are placed by the binder before SS. Matthew
and Mark. Much is lost.
</p>

<p>
383, 384, 385 are all Collegii Romani [xvi], 4to, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, with a commentary.
</p>

<p>
386. (Act. 151, Paul. 199, Apoc. 70: <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, note.) Rom. Vat. Ottobon.
66 [xv], 11-½ × 8-3/8, ff. 393 (24), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>,
στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Euthal.</hi> (Cath., Paul.), once <q>Jo. Angeli ducis ab
Altamps,</q> as also Codd. 388, 389, 390, Paul. 202.
</p>

<p>
387. Rom. Vat. Ottob. 204 [xii], 8-½ × 6-½, ff. 298 (21), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>,
στίχ.
</p>

<p>
388. Rom. Vat. Ottob. 212 [xii], 8-3/8 × 6-¼, ff. 315 (21), <hi rend='italic'>argent.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, once
belonged to Alexius and Theodora.
</p>

<p>
389. Rom. Vat. Ottob. 297 [xi], 6-¾ × 5-3/8, ff. 192 (23), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ. with <hi rend='italic'>harm.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ.
</p>

<p>
390. (Act. 164, Paul. 203.) Rom. Vat. Ottob. 381 [dated 1282], 4to,
8-5/8 × 6, ff. 336 (29), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, men.; <hi rend='italic'>Euthal.</hi> (Paul.), with scholia, was in
a church at Scio <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1359.
</p>

<p>
391. Rom. Vat. Ottob. 432 [xi, April 13, Indiction 8], 11-3/8 × 9-1/8, ff.
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
232 (17), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, with a commentary.
Given to Benedict XIII (1724-30) by Abachum Andriani, an abbot of
Athos. Matt. i. 1-8; Luke i; John vii. 53-viii. 11 were written [xv].
</p>

<p>
392. Rom. Barberin. v. 17, formerly 225, is the cursive portion of
Evan. Y [xii], 11-¼ × 8, ff. (391 - 8 = ) 383 (36), κεφ., τίτλ., with Theophylact's
commentary.
</p>

<p>
393. (Act. 167, Paul. 185.) Rom. Vallicell. E. 22 [xvi], <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>,
10-½ × 6-7/8, ff. 222 (34), κεφ., τίτλ. (<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> later).
</p>

<p>
394. (Act. 170, Paul. 186.) Rom. Vallicell. F. 17 [July 4, 1330, Indict.
13], <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 9-¼ × 6-¼, ff. 344 (29), <hi rend='italic'>argent.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>,
written by Michael, a priest.
</p>

<p>
395. Rom. Casanatensis G. iv. 1 [xii], 11 × 8-¼, ff. ?, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, with marginal corrections, bought about 1765.
</p>

<p>
396. Rom. Chisianus R. iv. 6 [xii], 8-¾ × 6-½, ff. 115 (27), <hi rend='italic'>argent.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, begins Matt, xxiii. 27.
</p>

<p>
397. Rom. Vallicell. E. 40 [xv], 9-5/8 × 8-¼, ff. 295 (10), St. John with
a catena (described by Bianchini).
</p>

<p>
398. Taurin. Univ. C ii. 5 [xiii, or xvi in Pasinus' Catalogue], select
passages with a catena, 12-1/8 × 8-½, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, ff. 310 (30), 2 cols.
</p>

<p>
399. Taurin. C. ii. 14 [xv, or xvi in Pasinus' Cat.], <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 11-5/8 × 8,
ff. 404 (22), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, commentary, sometimes without the text.
Found by Dr. Hort to contain SS. John, Luke (with Titus of Bostra's
commentary), Matthew, <hi rend='italic'>hoc ordine</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> p. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>.
</p>

<p>
400. (Act. 181, Paul. 200.) Berolinensis Reg. A. Duodec. 10, Diezii
[xv], 5 × 3-¾, ff. 249 (14-16), <hi rend='italic'>Euthal.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, damaged by fire and water,
contains Matt. xii. 29-xiii. 2: and the Acts and Epistles, except Acts
i. 11-ii. 11; Rom. i. 1-27; 1 Cor. xiv. 12-xv. 46; 2 Cor. i. 1-8;
v. 4-19; 1 Tim. iv. 1-Heb. i. 9. This copy belonged to Henry Benzil,
Archbishop of Upsal, then to Laurence Benzelstierna, Bishop of Arosen:
it was described by C. Aurivill (1802), collated by G. T. Pappelbaum
(1815).
</p>

<p>
401. Neapolit. Bibl. Nat. II. Aa. 3 [xi or xii], 8-1/8 × 6-1/8, ff. 113 (23),
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi> (later), contains Matthew, Mark vi. 1-xvi.
20, Luke, John i. 1-xii. 1.
</p>

<p>
402. Neapol. Nat. II. Aa. 5 [xiv or xv], 6-¼ × 4-½, ff. 253 (24), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
403. Neapol. Nat. II. Aa. 4 [xii or xiii], <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 7 × 4-7/8, ff. 212 (22),
<hi rend='italic'>argent.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> Contains Matt. xii. 23-xix. 12; 28-xxviii.
20; Mark; Luke i. 1-v. 21; 36-xxiv. 53; John i. 1-xviii.
36.
</p>

<p>
404. Neapol. <q>Abbatis Scotti</q> [xi], 8vo, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> Not known.
</p>

<p>
The manuscripts once belonging to the Nani family, which include
Evan. U, were catalogued by J. A. Mingarelli (<q>Graeci codices manu
scripti apud Nanios Patricios Venetos asservati,</q> Bononiae, 1784), and,
being now at St. Mark's, were inspected by Burgon.
</p>

<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>

<p>
405. Venet. Marc. i. 10, <q>olim Nan. 3, antea monasterii SS. Cosmae et
Damiani urbis Prusiensis,</q> i.e. Brusa or Prusa [xi], 8-1/8 × 7, ff. 228 (22),
<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, the leaves utterly
disarranged by the binder. (Wiedmann and J. G. J. Braun collated
portions of 405-417 for Scholz.)
</p>

<p>
406. Ven. Marc. i. 10, Nan. 4 [xi], 6-3/8 × 5-7/8, ff. 297 (18), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), few <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Mark iv. 41-v. 14; Luke iii. 16-iv.
4.
</p>

<p>
407. Ven. Marc. i. 12, Nan. 5 [xi], 6 × 5-1/8, ff. 87 (21), contains Luke
v. 30-John ix. 2. Κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, στίχοι βω at the
end of St. Luke, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>
</p>

<p>
408. Ven. Marc. i. 14, Nan. 7 [xii], 9-¼ × 5-1/8, ff. 261 (22), once belonged
to St. John Chrysostom's monastery, by the Jordan, as stated in
a note of the original scribe. <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>,
few <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, full stops very numerous in the text.
Matt. i. 1-13 and <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> later.
</p>

<p>
409. Ven. Marc. i. 15, Nan. 8 [xii or xiv], 8-¼ × 5-¾, ff. 210 (28), the
writing and <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> very rough, the stops being mostly red crosses. <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ.,
<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, foreign matter by Cosmas, &amp;c. (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>).
</p>

<p>
410. Ven. Marc. i. 17, Nan. 10 [xiii or xiv], 9-¼ × 6-¾, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, ff. 212,
written by one Joasaph a monk, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> [xiii], on parchment,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> on paper. Κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>,
στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>
</p>

<p>
411. Ven. Marc. i. 18, Nan. 11 [x or xi], 6-½ × 4-7/8, ff. 375 (20), very
beautifully written in upright characters. <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, matter
by Cosmas (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Pict.</hi> torn out.
</p>

<p>
412. Ven. Marc. i. 19, Nan. 12 [1301], 7 × 5-¼, ff. 327 (22), written
by Theodore (see p. <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, note 1). <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi> In text it much resembles
Scrivener's q and r by the same hand, without being identical with
either.
</p>

<p>
413. Ven. Marc. i. 20, Nan. 13 [1302, Indiction 15], 8-¾ × 6-¾, ff. 270
(24), once belonged to St. Catherine's monastery on Sinai, where Cod. א
was found, and is elegantly written by one Theodosius ῥακευδύτης. <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, rude <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ.,
<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>
</p>

<p>
414. Ven. Marc. i. 21, Nan. 14 [xiv], 9-¼ × 6-½, ff. 225 (26), κεφ., τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, written by Philip, a monk.
</p>

<p>
415. Ven. Marc. i. 22, Nan. 15 [dated January, 1356], 7-¼ × 5-¼, ff.?,
<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, rude <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>
</p>

<p>
416. Ven. Marc. i. 24, Nan. 17 [xiv], 7-¾ × 5-7/8, ff. 225 (22), very
roughly written, begins Matt. xxv. 36, ends John xviii. 7. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt.
xxvi. 17-xxvii. 17; 35-Mark ii. 27. Κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> (κεφ., τίτλ. later), <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
Eus., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (later), ἀναγν., with changes by different hands.
</p>

<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>

<p>
417. Ven. Marc. i. 25, Nan. 18 [xii-xiv], 9-1/8 × 5-7/8, ff. 112 (27, 26),
begins Matt. v. 44, ends Luke vi. 9. Κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (later),
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>
</p>

<p>
418. Ven. Marc. i. 28, Nan. 21 [xv], <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 8-¾ × 6-¼, ff. 110 (17),
2 cols., contains SS. Matthew and Mark, down to ch. xiii. 32, unfinished,
in two columns. Κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> with <hi rend='italic'>harm.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>,
many red crosses for stops.
</p>

<p>
419. Ven. Marc. i. 60, formerly at St. Michael's, Venice, <q>prope
Murianum,</q> 241 [xi or xii], 7-5/8 × 6, ff. 260 (22), ends John xxi. 7
(described by J. B. Mittarelli, Venice, 1779). <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> John viii. 44-xi. 32,
supplied by a later hand. Κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, with
red musical notes.
</p>

<p>
420. Messanensis Univ. 18 (Schulz's 237) [xiv], 6-7/8 × 4-7/8, ff. 127 (22),
<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> (πρόγραμμα), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ. with <hi rend='italic'>harm.</hi>, also <hi rend='italic'>harm.</hi>
at bottom of the page, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, by different
hands, with readings from other copies (inspected by Munter, as was
Cod. 421).
</p>

<p>
421. (Act. 176, Paul. 218.) Syracusanus (Schulz's 238) [xii] ?, once
Landolini's; <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi> Dr. Gregory could not find it.
</p>

<p>
422. Monacensis Reg. 210, at Munich [xi or later], 9-¼ × 6-½, ff. 256
(28), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> (partially), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>
(later), <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, roughly written in two columns by the
monk Joseph, but St. John in a somewhat more recent hand; described
by Ignatius Hardt and Dean Burgon. It abounds with itacisms and
strange blunders, and other tokens of great ignorance on the part of the
scribe.
</p>

<p>
423. Mon. Reg. 36 [1556], <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 13-3/8 × 9-¼, ff. 465 (30), contains
St. Matthew with Nicetas' catena. Marked. Τόμος A and superbly bound,
as in Cod. 432. The same scribe wrote Codd. 424, 425, 432 (Burgon).
</p>

<p>
424. Mon. Reg. 83 [xvi], <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 13-3/8 × 8-¾, ff. 399, contains St. Luke
with the commentary of Titus of Bostra and others.
</p>

<p>
425. Mon. Reg. 37 [xvi], <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 13-3/8 × 9-¼, ff. 576 (30), second volume of
423, contains St. John with a very full catena of Nicetas. Marked
Τόμος B.
</p>

<p>
426. Mon. Reg. 473, once Augsburg 9 [xiv], 9-¾ × 6-¾, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, ff. 208
(26), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, contains Luke vi. 17-xi. 26 with Nicetas' catena, the
second of four volumes (δεύτερον τῶν τεσσάρων τεῦχος τῶν εἰς τὸ κατὰ Λουκᾶν
ἅγιον εὐαγγέλιον κατὰ συναγωγὴν ἐξηγήσεων).
</p>

<p>
427. Mon. Reg. 465, Augsburg 10 [xii or xiii], 10-1/8 × 8-1/8, ff. 140
(34), <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (ῥήμ., στίχ. Luke), written by one Maurus, contains
SS. Luke and Mark with Theophylact's (and Victor's ?) commentary.
</p>

<p>
428. Mon. Reg. 381, Augsburg 11 [xiii], 12-3/8 × 9-¼, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, ff. 335
(33), with rude pictures of the Evangelists on a vellum leaf. Its subscriptions
are like those of Evann. Λ, 262, &amp;c. The commentary is
Theophylact's.
</p>

<p>
429. Mon. Reg. 208 [xii or xiii], a superb 4to, 10-7/8 × 9-1/8, ff. 234 (35),
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>
2 cols., written by John, a priest and <q>ἔκδικος magnae ecclesiae,</q> contains
Luke i. 1-ii. 39 with a catena, questions and answers from SS. Matthew
and John, with the text. Burgon declares that the date June 20,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 978, Indiction 6, which we took from Scholz (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> above, p. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>,
note 2), is that of the manuscript this was copied from, not of Cod. 429
itself. In that case we have another early dated cursive the less.
Gregory, Prolegomena, p. 449, inclines to the placing of this MS. amongst
the uncials.
</p>

<p>
430. Mon. Reg. 437 [xi], 11-5/8 × 8-5/8, ff. 354 (24), contains John i-viii
with the catena of Nicetas, metropolitan of Heraclia Serrarum in Macedonia,
now <hi rend='italic'>Xevosna</hi>. Martin Crusius of Tübingen procured it from
Leontius, a Cyprian monk, in 1590, and sent it to the Library at Augsburg.
</p>

<p>
431. (Act. 180, Paul. 238.) Molsheimensis [xii], <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> with
many unusual readings, was brought to Strasburg from the Jesuits'
College at Molsheim in Alsace. Extracts were made from it by the
Jesuit Hermann Goldhagen (N. T. Mogunt. 1753), and it was collated by
Arendt, 1833. <q>Periit a. 1870,</q> Gregory.
</p>

<p>
432. Mon. Reg. 99 [xvi], <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 13-½ × 8-7/8 ff. 572 (30), contains
St. Mark with the commentary of Victor of Antioch, being the same
copy as Peltanus used for his Latin edition of that work, Ingolstad,
1580.
</p>

<p>
433. Berolinensis Reg. MS. 4to, 12 (kn) (Schulz's 239) [xi or xii],
8 × 5-¾, ff. 80 (24), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, brought from the
East by W. Ern. de Knobelsdorf, with a mixed text and many errors in
very minute letters. It contains Matt. i. 1-21; vi. 12-32; xxii. 25-xxviii.
20; Mark i. 1-v. 29; ix. 21-xiii. 12; Luke viii. 27-John
ix. 21; xx. 15-xxi. 25. (G. T. Pappelbaum, 1824.)
</p>

<p>
434. Vindobon. Caes. 71, formerly 42 [xiv], 11-¾ × 7-¾, ff. 424 (29),
contains St. Luke with a catena. Like Codd. 218, &amp;c., bought at Constantinople
by De Busbeck.
</p>

<p>
435. Lugd.-Bat. Bibl. Univ. Gronovii 137 (Schulz's 245) [x], 8-5/8 × 6-1/8,
ff. 284 (24), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 20-ii. 13; xxii. 4-9 (John x. 14-xxi.
25 in a rather later hand). It has a somewhat unusual text (collated,
as was also Evan. 122, by J. Dermout, Collectanea Critica in N. T.,
1825).
</p>

<p>
436. Meerman. 117 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1322], ff. 277. Dr. Gregory has traced this
MS. to No. 54 in the library of the Jesuit College at Clermont, then to
Meerman, then to Payne a London bookseller, who bought it in 1824.
It is not known now. For the MS. once in Dean Burgon's possession but
in the Bodleian Library, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 562.
</p>

<p>
437. Petropol. Caes. [xi], like Cod. E of the Pauline Epistles, one
leaf of the Colbert Pentateuch, and some other manuscripts, has found its
way from the Coislin library and the Abbey of St. Germain des Prés
near Paris, to St. Petersburg. It was written by Michael Cerularius,
Patriarch of Constantinople, and noticed by Matthaei (N. T. iii. p. 99,
2nd ed.). Not in Muralt's List.
</p>

<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>

<p>
438. Brit Mus. Addit. 5111, 5112 (Askew 621) [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1189], 10 × 7,
ff. 211 and 241 (18), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>
(no <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>). It was written by Gregory a monk, and is in two volumes,
containing severally Matt. and Mark, Luke and John.
</p>

<p>
439. Brit. Mus. Addit. 5107 (Askew 622) [dated April, 1159, Ind. 7],
12-¼ × 9-½, ff. 219 (23), 2 cols., written by the monk Nepho, at Athos,
<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> (Bloomfield).
</p>

<p>
440. (Act. 111, Paul. 221.) Camb. Univ. Libr. Mm. vi. 9 [xii], 7 × 5-½,
ff. 288 (28), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> (later); <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> (Cath. and
Paul.), <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> (Paul.). From this copy Griesbach's readings in Cod. 236
were derived. Described below under Scrivener's v before Evan. 507.
</p>

<p>
441, 442, at Cambridge, must be removed from Scholz's list; they
are <hi rend='italic'>printed</hi> editions with manuscript notes. Cod. 441 is Act. 110, Paul.
222; Cod. 442 is Act. 152, Paul. 223.
</p>

<p>
443. Camb. Univ. Libr. Nn. ii. 36, once Askew 624 [xii], 11 × 8-¼,
ff. 235 (24), 2 cols, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, some <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>
(later), <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> The κεφάλαια proper are subdivided in this
copy, e.g. the 19th of St. Matthew, into no less than thirteen parts
(see p. <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, note 2). For the titles of the Gospels, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 69. Evan.
443 was bought for the University Library in 1775 for £20, at the
celebrated book-sale of Anthony Askew [1722-74], the learned physician
who projected an edition of Aeschylus. See Marsh on Michaelis, vol. ii.
pp. 661-2.
</p>

<p>
444. (Act. 153, Paul. 240.) Brit. Mus. Harl. 5796 [xv], 10-¼ × 7-½, ff.
324 (26-29), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, neatly
written, sold in 1537 <q>aspris 500:<note place='foot'>The asper or asprum was a mediaeval Greek silver coin (derived from ἄσπρος,
<foreign rend='italic'>albus</foreign>); we may infer its value from a passage cited by Ducange from Vincentius
Bellovac. xxx. 75 <q>quindecim drachmas seu asperos.</q></note></q> bought at Smyrna in 1722 by
Bernard Mould.
</p>

<p>
445. Brit. Mus. Harl. 5736 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1506], <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 8-¼ × 6, ff. 194 (24),
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, in the hand <q>Antonii cujusdam eparchi,</q> once (like
Apoc. 31) in the Jesuits' College, Agen, on the Garonne.
</p>

<p>
446. Brit. Mus. Harl. 5777 [xv], 9 × 6, ff. 228 or 231 (25), κεφ., τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> (not Matt.), <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> (Luke), <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i.
1-17; Mark i. 7-9; Luke i. 1-18; John i. 1-22, by a person who mischievously
cut out the ornaments. It is clearly but unskilfully written,
and Covell states on the outer leaf that it seems a copy from his manuscript,
noted above as Evan. 65. This codex is Cov. 5 (Bloomfield).
</p>

<p>
447. Brit. Mus. Harl. 5784 [xv], 7-¼ × 5-¾, ff. 329 (21), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> (Paul.); well written,
and much like
</p>

<p>
448. Brit. Mus. Harl. 5790 [dated Rome, April 25, 1478], 12-¼ × 8-½,
ff. 299 (22), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ. in margin, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, beautifully written
by John Rhesus of Crete a priest for Francis Gonzaga Cardinal of S. Maria
Nuova: belonged to Giovanni Pietro Arrivabene.
</p>

<p>
449. Brit. Mus. Addit. 4950-1 [xiii], 5 × 3-½, 2 vols., ff. 146 and 171,
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>
(23), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, clearly and
carefully written; once Caesar de Missy's (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 44).
</p>

<p>
Out of this whole mass of 190 manuscripts, Scholz collated five entire
(262, 299, 300, 301, 346), eleven in the greater part (260, 270, 271,
277, 284, 285, 298, 324, 353, 382, 428), many in a few places, and not
a few seem to have been left by him untouched. His list of Oriental
manuscripts (Evann. 450-469), as it is given in the first volume of his
Greek Testament (Proleg. pp. xcvi-xcvii)<note place='foot'><p>450. Great Gr. Monastery at Jerusalem 1 [July 1, 1043], 8vo, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, first
three Gospels with an Arabic version, neatly written by a reader, Euphemius.
This appears to be Coxe's 6, 4to, St. Luke only.
</p>
<p>
451. Jerusalem 2 [xii], 8vo.
</p>
<p>
452. Jerusalem 3 [xiv], 8vo.
</p>
<p>
453. Jerusalem 4 [xiv], 8vo.
</p>
<p>
454. Jerusalem 5 [xiv], 8vo.
</p>
<p>
455. Jerusalem 6 [xiv], 4to, with a commentary.
</p>
<p>
456. Jerusalem 7 [xiii], 4to, St. Matthew with a commentary, neatly written.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Perhaps</hi> Coxe's 43 [xi], in gold <emph>uncial</emph> letters.
</p>
<p>
457. St. Saba 2 [xiii], 4to, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, is Act. 186, Paul. 234.
</p>
<p>
458. St. Saba 3 [dated 1272, Indiction 15], 16mo.
</p>
<p>
459. St. Saba 7 [xii], 8vo.
</p>
<p>
460. St. Saba 8 [xii], 8vo.
</p>
<p>
461. See Evan. 481.
</p>
<p>
462. St. Saba 10 [xiv], 4to, is also Act. 187, Paul. 235, Apoc. 86.
</p>
<p>
463. St. Saba 11 [xiv], 4to, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
</p>
<p>
464. St. Saba 12 [xi], 4to.
</p>
<p>
465. St. Saba 19 [xiii], 8vo.
</p>
<p>
466. St. Saba 20 [xiii], 8vo, is Act. 189, Paul. 237, Apoc. 86<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> or 89. Also <q>from
a monastery in the island of Patmos.</q>
</p>
<p>
467. [xi], 4to.
</p>
<p>
468. [xii], 8vo, with a commentary.
</p>
<p>
469. [xiv], 4to.</p></note>, has been withdrawn from the
catalogue of cursive copies of the Gospels, in deference to the wish of the
Dean of Chichester (Letter iii addressed to myself in the <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi> newspaper,
July 5, 1882). It must be confessed indeed that Scholz's account
of what he had seen in the East about 1823 cannot be easily reconciled
with the description of the Rev. H. O. Coxe of the Bodleian Library
thirty-five years later (<q>Report to Her Majesty's Government of the
Greek Manuscripts yet remaining in the Libraries of the Levant, 1858</q>);
that most of the books which Scholz catalogued at St. Saba on the Dead
Sea were removed before 1875, as Mr. F. W. Pennefather informs us, to
the Great Greek Convent of the Cross at Jerusalem; and that at least
four of them were brought to Parham in Sussex from St. Saba in 1834 by
the late Lord de la Zouche. Instead of Scholz's seven (450-6), Coxe saw
fourteen copies of the Gospels at Jerusalem; twenty of the Gospels
(besides a noble palimpsest of the Orestes and Phoenissae) at St. Saba
after the four had been subtracted, instead of Scholz's ten (457-466); at
Patmos five instead of Scholz's three (467-469). In spite of one's
respect for the memory of that zealous and worthy labourer, M. A. Scholz,
with whom I had a personal conference regarding our common studies in
1845, I cannot help acquiescing in Dean Burgon's decision, though not,
perhaps, without some natural reluctance.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VIII. Cursive Manuscripts Of The Gospels. Part II.</head>

<p>
We have already intimated that Tischendorf has chosen to
make no addition to the numerical list of cursive manuscripts
furnished by Scholz, preferring to indicate the fresh
materials which have since come to light by another notation,
derived from the names of the collators or the places where they
are deposited. As this plan has proved in practice very inconvenient,
it is no wonder that Dean Burgon, after casting away
Scholz's numbers from 450 to 469, on account of their evident
inaccuracy, which has since then received definite proof, should
have assigned numerals to the cursives unknown to Scholz from
450 to 737, still excluding, as far as was then possible, those
whose location or character was uncertain. Burgon's method, as
laid down in his Letters in the <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi> for July 5, 12, 19, 26,
1882, having the priority of publication, and being arranged with
regard to the places where the manuscripts are deposited rather
than to their actual collators, may as well be adopted as any other
that might be made. The only important point to be secured is
that all scholars should employ the SAME NUMBERS when
speaking of the SAME MANUSCRIPTS.
</p>

<p>
It is greatly to be regretted that Dr. C. R. Gregory, even upon
advice tendered by other critics, if such was the case, should
have neglected the important principle laid down in the preceding
sentence, and in Part II of his very valuable Prolegomena
to Tischendorf's eighth edition, published seven years after the
third edition of this work, should have helped to make confusion
worse confounded in this large and increasing field. But it is
not my object to assail one who has done this study very great
<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>
service, but only to point out an inconvenience which I shall
endeavour to minimize as far as I can. It is clear that Dr.
Scrivener's order, being the first out, and having been followed
since then in quotations in books, and notably by the late
learned Abbé Martin, cannot be allowed to drop. I have therefore
followed it in the succeeding pages. But it has been my
object to bring together the two lists as soon as possible after the
close of Dr. Scrivener's, and the end of the supplementary lists
of Dean Burgon and the Abbé Martin, and to follow, as far as the
case will admit, the lead of Dr. Gregory, where he has every
right to prescribe the series of numbers. Unfortunately, this
course is not always open, because when the time has arrived it
is found that some MSS. have been already forestalled, and
others are in arrear.
</p>

<p>
It should be added, that the number of the MSS. as standing
in Dr. Gregory's list, where it varies from the present, is given
at the end of the account of each manuscript; and reversely
a table is added at the end of this volume of the varying numbers
in this list which answer to the numbers in Dr. Gregory's list.
</p>

<p>
We begin with the following twenty Italian manuscripts,
added to our previous list of cursive copies of the Gospels by
Burgon in Letters addressed to Dr. Scrivener and inserted in
the <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi> of Jan. 29 and Feb. 5, 1873.
</p>

<p>
450. Ferrara, Univ. 119, NA. 4 [xiv], 8vo, ff. ?, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> (Lat. later),
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> (Lat. <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> later). (Greg. 581.)
</p>

<p>
451. (Act. 194, Paul. 222, Apoc. 102.) Ferr. Univ. 187, 188, N A. 7
[<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1334], 6-¾ × 4-¾, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, ff.?, <hi rend='italic'>capp.</hi> Lat., containing the whole New
Testament: the only divisions recognized are those of the modern
chapters in vermilion. (Greg. 582.)
</p>

<p>
452. Parma, Reg. 5 [xi or xii], 13-½ × 9-½, ff. 284 (21), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>argent.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, once belonging
to the Bonvisi family, then transferred to the Public Library at
Lucca. As superb a copy as any known, the illuminations gorgeous, the
first page of the Gospel and other portions in gold, with a <q>luxurious
prodigality</q> of miniatures. (Greg. 583.)
</p>

<p>
453. Parma, Reg. 95 [xi, or older], 7-3/8 × 5-1/8, ff. 318, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, very tastefully decorated. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 1-20.
<hi rend='italic'>Lect.</hi> and marginal corrections by the first hand in vermilion. (Greg.
584.)
</p>

<p>
454. Modena, Bibl. Estensis ii. A. 1 [xi or xii], a beautiful copy, 7-½ ×
4-½, ff. ?, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> at beginning and end, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, superb
<hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, with slight marginal corrections of the text. (Greg. 585.)
</p>

<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>

<p>
455. Mod. Bibl. Est. ii. A. 5 [xiv], 6-½ × 4-7/8, ff. 239 (20), <hi rend='italic'>argent.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, small and neat, without
<hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> or illuminations. (Greg. 586.)
</p>

<p>
Here also is a late copy of Victor of Antioch's commentary on St. Mark.
</p>

<p>
456. Milan, in the great Ambrosian Library, M. 48 sup., 8-¾ × 7-3/8,
ff. 183, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>argent.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, beautifully written,
<hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> almost obliterated. <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>). The last leaf more recent.
(Greg. 587.)
</p>

<p>
457. Milan, Ambros. E. 63 sup. [May, 1321, Indiction 4], 8-½ × 5-7/8, ff.
221, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Luke xxiv. 5-John i. 8, and the early part of John v. <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not
<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (Greg. 588.)
</p>

<p>
458, 459, 460. For these Dr. Gregory inserts Milan, Ambr. A. 178
sup., Parmae Reg. 15, Rom. Corsin. 41. G. 16, but without explanation.
<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> below, Evann. 830, 831, 837.
</p>

<p>
458. Milan, Ambros. D. 161 inf. [xvi], transcribed from an original
in the Vatican, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> St. Mark's Gospel with Victor of Antioch's
commentary.
</p>

<p>
459. Milan, Ambros. D. 282 inf., transcribed by John Sancta Maura,
a one-eyed Cyprian, aged 74, June 9, 1612: <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, with a catena.
</p>

<p>
460. Milan, Ambros. D. 298 inf., transcribed by the same, fol., <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
These two codices purport to be commentaries of Peter of Laodicea on
St. John and St. Mark respectively: but <q>such titles are quite misleading,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Burgon, Letter to <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, Feb. 5, 1873.
</p>

<p>
461. (Act. 197, Paul. 223.) Milan, Ambros. Z. 34 sup. [xiii or xiv],
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 6-½ × 4-¾, ff. 295 (31), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>,
ῥήμ., στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, with <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> on vellum not belonging to it. The
order of its contents is Catholic Epp., Pauline Epp., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, Gospels.
(Greg. 592.)
</p>

<p>
462. Venice, Ven. Marc. i. 58 [xiii], 9-¾ × 7, ff. 153 (22), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, wrongly called an Evangelistarium in the Supplementary
Catalogue, contains only Mark i. 44-Luke xxiv. 53; John i. 15-xi.
13. (Greg. 593.)
</p>

<p>
463. Instead of Ven. i. xxxix. 8, 7, or Nan. 27, which appears to be a
commentary&mdash;Ven. Marc. ii. 7 [xiv], 12-¾ x 9-7/8, ff. 430 (31), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> (John),
κεφ., τίτλ., with Euthymius Zigabenus' commentary. (Greg. 600.)
</p>

<p>
464. Ven. Marc. i. 59 [xii, Greg. xiii], 6-½ × 4-7/8, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ. (<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. later), with very remarkable readings. Burgon collated
sixteen chapters in the several Gospels. (Greg. 597.)
</p>

<p>
465. Ven. Marc. i. 57 [xi or xii], 11-5/8 × 8-¼, ff. 228 (29), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., ends Mark xii. 18, with Theophylact's commentary. (Greg. 596.)
</p>

<p>
466. Ven. Marc. 494 [xv, Greg. xiii], 16-¾ × 11-¼, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, ff. 320 (50),
2 cols., full of various Patristic matter. (Greg. 598.)
</p>

<p>
467. Ven. Marc. 495 [xv], 16 × 11-¼, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, ff. 437 (42), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, described by Zanetti, p. 259, with a commentary
(Victor's on St. Mark). (Greg. 599.)
</p>

<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>

<p>
We do not include Ven. Marc. i. 61, which is a mere catena on Matt.
i-ix, or an unnumbered catena of St. Luke in the same Library, or
Ven. M. 1, an uncial copy of the Old Testament [ix ?], at the end of
which are found <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi> of unique fullness, as if the Gospels were
to follow.
</p>

<p>
468. Ven. Marc. 56 [xvi], fol., <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 11-3/8 × 7-7/8 ff. ?, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> (John),
<hi rend='italic'>capp.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Lat.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, wrongly set down by Scholz as Evst. 143,
contains the Gospels, beginning Matt. v. 44. It was once <q>S. Michaelis
Venet. prope Murianum,</q> and is described in Mittarelli's Catalogue of
that Library, p. 1099. (Greg. 595.)
</p>

<p>
469. Quaritch i. [xi-xii], 10-¼ × 7-½, ff. ? (19), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, headings. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> at beginning and at beginning of St. Luke and
end of St. John. Beautifully written in gold letters. (E. M., March 18,
1893.)
</p>

<p>
470. Ven. s. Lazarus 1531 [xiii, Greg. xiv], 10 × 7-¾, ff. 234 (?), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> (John), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν. (later), <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., is a fragment of the Gospels
containing Matt. i. 22-Luke xxiii. 15; 33-48. (Greg. 594.)
</p>

<p>
471. Quaritch ii. [xi], 5-7/8 × 4-¾, ff. ? (25), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., ἀναγν. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> here and there: beautifully
written, and otherwise complete. Belonged to the Hon. Frederic
North. (E. M., March 18, 1893.)
</p>

<p>
472. (Act. 235, Paul. 276, Apoc. 103.) Poictiers [xvi], small folio,
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, of the whole New Testament, as described to Burgon by M. Dartige,
the librarian there. Two librarians named Cavou successfully robbed
the library, and probably sold miniatures and pictures. (H. C. Hoskier.)
G. Haenel (Catal. Librorum MSS. Lips. 1830) names this and another of
the whole N. T. at Arras [xv], 8vo, but of the latter the librarian,
M. Wicquot, knows nothing.
</p>

<p>
Edward de Muralt, in his N. T. <q>ad fidem codicis principis Vaticani,</q>
1848 (p. 111), inserts a collation of eleven manuscripts (five of the Gospels,
one Psalter with hymns, five Lectionaries), chiefly at St. Petersburg.
He also describes them in his Preface (pp. lv-lvii), and in the Catalogue
of Greek Manuscripts in the Imperial Library there. The copies of the
Gospels are&mdash;
</p>

<p>
473. 2<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>pe</hi>, 81 Hort (Petrop. vi. 470) [ix-x Hort], 8-1/8 × 5-1/8, ff. 405 (18,
19), <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ. (in silver uncials), <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, a
purple MS. with golden letters, very beautiful, said to have been written
by the Empress Theodora. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> John xi. 26-48; xiii. 2-23. St. Mark
of this MS. was edited by J. Belsheim with facsimile in 1885 (Jacob
Dybwad, Christiania). Highly valued by some critics. (Greg. 565.)
</p>

<p>
474. 4<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>pe</hi>, Petrop. 98. Formerly Pogodini 472 [xii or xiii], ff. 194 (23,
24), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (Greg. 571.)
</p>

<p>
475. 7<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>pe</hi>, Petrop. ix. 3. 471 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1062], 9-7/8 × 7-1/8, ff. 357 (12), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, with Victor's Commentary
on St. Mark. (Greg. 569.)
</p>

<p>
476. 8<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>pe</hi>, Petrop. Muralt. 105 [xii or xiii], 7 × 4-7/8, ff. 225 (27), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> Brought by Titoff from Turkey.
</p>

<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>

<p>
477. 11<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>pe</hi>, Petrop. 118 (Q. v. 1, 15) [xv], 7 × 5-5/8, ff. 384, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, written for Demetrius Palaeologus.
</p>

<p>
478<note place='foot'>The Psalter 5<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>pe</hi> (Petrop. ix. 1) [994], containing the hymns, Luke i. 46-55;
68-79; ii. 29-32, is like our Evan. 612, which see.</note> tisch.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi> Leipzig, Univ. Libr. Tisch. iv. [x], 6-¾ × 5-¼, ff. 360 (21),
<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi> Brought
by Tischendorf from the East (Tisch., Anecdota sacra et profana, pp. 20-29).
(Greg. 564.)
</p>

<p>
479. tisch.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> Petrop. Muralt. 97 [xii], 7-7/8 × 6-1/8, ff. 191. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i.
1-16; 30; John xvi. 20-xx. 25. (Tisch., Notitia Cod. Sinait., p. 60.)
(Greg. 570.)
</p>

<p>
480. tisch.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> Petrop. Muralt. 99 [xii], 7-3/8 × 4-7/8, ff. 19 (12), Matt. viii.
3-ix. 50. (Tisch., Notitia Cod. Sinait., p. 64.) (Greg. 572.)
</p>

<p>
481. Petrop. (Scholz's 461, St. Saba 9) [May 7, 835, Indiction 13],
6-3/8 × 3-7/8, ff. 344 (19), κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> The date, being the earliest known
of a Greek N. T. MS., is plainly visible in a photographed facsimile in
<q>Exempla Codicum Graecorum literis minusculis scriptorum</q> (fol.,
Heidelberg, 1878), Tab. 1, by Wattenbach and von Velsen. This
precious treasure was the property of Porphyry Uspensky, Bp. of Kiow,
but is now at St. Petersburg. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 461.)
</p>

<p>
The five following are in the Bodleian Library, and for the most part
uncollated:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
482. Oxf. Bodl. Cromwell 15 [xi], 8-½ × 6-¼, ff. 216 (24), exquisitely
written, with textual corrections in the margin. <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (few in later hand). <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Mark xvi. 17
(ταῦτα)-end; John xix. 29-end. This copy and the next in order came
in 1727 from Παντοκράτωρ on Athos.  (Greg. 527.)
</p>

<p>
483. Oxf. Bodl. Crom. 16 [xi], 8 × 6, ff. 354 (20), fairly written. The
Gospels are followed by the Proper Lessons for the Holy Week. <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> (later), ἀρχαί and τέλη. Collated
in 1749 by Th. Mangey, Prebendary of Durham, the editor of Philo
[1684-1755]. <q>It is well worth proper examination</q> (E. B. Nicholson,
Bodley's Librarian). (Greg. 528.)
</p>

<p>
484. Oxf. Bodl. Misc. Gr. 17, Auct. D. Infra 2, 21 [xi], 5-½ × 4, ff. 363
(20), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, in text said to
resemble Cod. 71, once Humphrey Wanley's [1672-1726], bought in
1776 by Sam. Smalbroke, fifty-four years Canon Residentiary of Lichfield,
was presented by him on his eightieth birthday, June 4, 1800.
(Greg. 529.)
</p>

<p>
485. Oxf. Bodl. Misc. Gr. 141, Rawl. G. 3 [xi], 6 × 4-¼, ff. 303 (20),
with some foreign matter, has κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, a few <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, ἀρχαί
and τέλη, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> John xxi. 3-24. (Greg. 430.)
</p>

<p>
486. Oxf. Bodl. Misc. Gr. 293, Auct. T. V. 34 [xii or xiii], 7-¼ × 5-¼,
ff. 213 (27), <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> (except in Luke), ἀναγν.,
στίχ., κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> (Luke). Of a very unusual style. (Greg. 706.)
</p>

<p>
To this list we must add the five following copies from the collection
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
of the Abbot M. Aloy. Canonici, purchased at Venice in 1817 for the
Bodleian Library by Dr. Bandinel, who secured 2045 out of the total
number of 3550 manuscripts.
</p>

<p>
487. Oxf. Bodl. Canon. Gr. 33. Part of Evan. 288, which see.
</p>

<p>
488. Oxf. Bodl. Canon. Gr. 34 (Act. 211, Paul. 249, Apoc. 98) [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1515, 1516], 9 × 6-¼, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, ff. 319 (25), <hi rend='italic'>capp. Lat.</hi>, written by Michael
Damascenus the Cretan for John Francis Picus of Mirandola, contains
the whole N. T., the Apocalypse alone being yet collated (k<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>): <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
Apoc. ii. 11-23. It has Œcumenius' and Euthalius' <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> (Greg. 522.)
</p>

<p>
489. Oxf. Bodl. Canon. Gr. 36 [xi], 10 × 7-½, ff. 270 (22), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., Gospels: olim Georg.
Phlebaris. (Greg. 523.)
</p>

<p>
490. Oxf. Bodl. Canon. Gr. 112 [xii], 5-½ × 4-½, ff. 186 (21 &amp;c.), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men</hi>., Gospels well written.
(Greg. 524.)
</p>

<p>
491. Oxf. Bodl. Canon. Gr. 122 Cod. Sclavonicus [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1429], 12-½ × 9,
ff. 312 (20), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>,
στίχ., Gospels in Sclavonian with a Greek version later, written in
Moldavia by Gabriel, a monk. (Greg. 525.)
</p>

<p>
*492. Oxf. Ch. Ch. Wake<note place='foot'>In addition to Evann. 73, 74, Gaisford in 1837 catalogued, and Scrivener in
1861 inspected, these fourteen copies of the Gospels in the collection of Archbishop
Wake, now at Christ Church, Oxford. They were brought from Constantinople
about 1731, and have now been described in the Rev. G. W. Kitchin's
Catalogue of the Manuscripts in Christ Church Library (4to, 1867).</note> 12 (Act. 193, Paul. 277, Apoc. 26) Cod.
Dionysii (who wrote it) [xi], 12 × 9-½, ff. 240 (36), 2 cols., was also noted
by Scholz, on Gaisford's information, Evangelistarium 181, Apostol. 57:
but this is an error, as the Gospels are contained at full length and in
their proper order, with unusually full liturgical matter, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect</hi>., στίχ., ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> with synopsis). The Acts, Catholic and Pauline Epistles (Œcumenius'
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ., scholia) follow them, and last of all comes the Apocalypse.
<hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Luke xvi. 26-30; xvii. 5-8; xxiv. 22-24; John i. 1-vii.
39; viii. 31-ix. 11; x. 10-xi. 54; xii. 36-xiii. 27; Acts i. 1-vii.
49; x. 19-xiv. 10; xv. 15-xvi. 11; xviii. 1-xxi. 25; xxiii. 18-James
iii. 17; 1 Cor. xii. 11-xv. 12; xvi. 13-15; 2 Cor. xiii. 4, 5;
Gal. v. 16-vi. 18 (partly); 2 Tim. iii. 10, 11; Tit. iii. 5-7; the illuminations
also being often wantonly cut out. This copy contains
much foreign matter besides; its contents were carefully tabulated by
J. Walker; it was thoroughly collated by Scrivener in 1864. (Greg.
606.)
</p>

<p>
493. Oxf. Ch. Ch. Wake 21 [xi], 11 × 8-¼, ff. 221 (26), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>
(later), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> (later), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (partly later), ῥήμ.,
στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, brought from Παντοκράτωρ on Athos, 1727. The scribe's
name, Abraham Teudatus, a Patrician (Montfaucon, Palaeo. Gr., p. 46), is
written cruciform after <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi> (Greg. 507.)
</p>

<p>
494. Oxf. Ch. Ch. Wake 22 [xiii], 10 × 8, ff. 160 (24, 27), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, ἀναγν., in a wretched hand and bad condition,
begins Matt. i. 23, ends John xix. 31. Also <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> Matt. v. 26-vi. 23;
Luke xxiv. 9-28; John iii. 14-iv. 1; xv. 9-xvi. 6. (Greg. 508.)
</p>

<p>
495. Oxf. Ch. Ch. Wake 24 [xi], 11-¾ × 8-¾, ff. 229 (24), from Παντοκράτωρ
in 1727. <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> in gold.
One leaf (John xix. 13-29), and another containing John xxi. 24, 25, are
in duplicate at the beginning, <foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign>. (Greg. 509.) This copy
(as Wake remarks) is in the same style, but less free than:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
496. Oxf. Ch. Ch. Wake 25 [x or xi], 10-¾ × 8-¼, ff. 292 (22), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, τίτλ., some <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (in
red ink, nearly faded). (Greg. 510.)
</p>

<p>
497. Oxf. Ch. Ch. Wake. 27, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, [xiii], 9-½ × 6-¼, ff. 337 (20), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
(Matt.), κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> (Luke), <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> (Mark). <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> at
beginning. Matt, xviii. 9-Mark xiv. 13; Luke vii. 4-John xxi. 13
are [xiii], the rest supplied [xv]. (Greg. 511.)
</p>

<p>
498. Oxf. Ch. Ch. Wake 28 [xiii], 9 × 6-¾, ff. 210 (24), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, some
τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, much of this <hi rend='italic'>rubro</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., ἀναγν.
Subscribed Θῦ το δωρον και γρηγοριων πονος.  (Greg. 512.)
</p>

<p>
499. Oxf. Ch. Ch. Wake 29 [ςχ<note place='foot'>The letter χ is quite illegible, but the Indiction 9 belongs only to <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 831,
1131, 1431, while the style of the manuscript leaves no doubt which to choose.</note>λθ or <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1131, Indict. 9], 7-¾ × 6-¼,
ff. 162-4, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> in later hand (25), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. After some later fragments (Matt. i. 12-v. 3, and
other matter) on paper, the older copy begins Matt. v. 29. (Greg. 513.)
</p>

<p>
500. Oxf. Ch. Ch. Wake 30 [xii], 7-½ × 5-½, ff. 226 (23), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> (almost illegible), κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> in red, almost obliterated from
damp; ending John xx. 18, neatly written, but in ill condition. (Greg.
514.)
</p>

<p>
501. Oxf. Ch. Ch. Wake 31 [xi], 7 × 5-½, ff. 127 (34), small, in a very
elegant and minute hand. <hi rend='italic'>Pict.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, some τίτλ. (in gold), κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
(no <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> full, some στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> (Greg. 515.)
</p>

<p>
502. Oxf. Ch. Ch. Wake 32 [x or xi], 7-¼ × 5-½, ff. 287 (23), small,
elegant, and with much gold ornament. <hi rend='italic'>Pict.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., some τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, some στίχ. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> in places. (Greg. 516.)
</p>

<p>
*503 (Act. 190, Paul. 244, Apoc. 27.) Oxf. Ch. Ch. Wake 34 [xi or
xii], 10 × 8, ff. 201 (31, 29). This remarkable copy begins with the
ὑπόθεσις to 2 Peter, the second leaf contains Acts xvii. 24-xviii. 13 misplaced,
then follow the five later Catholic Epistles (<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> 1 John iii. 19-iv.
9) with ὑποθέσις: then the Apocalypse on the same page as Jude
ends, and the ὑπόθέσις to the Romans on the same page as the Apocalypse
ends, and then the Pauline Epistles (<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> Heb. vii. 26-ix. 28). All
the Epistles have <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, and Œcumenius' smaller (not the Euthalian)
κεφ., with much <hi rend='italic'>lect. primâ manu</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> later. Last, but
seemingly misplaced by an early binder, follow the Gospels, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Mark xvi. 2-17; Luke ii. 15-47; vi. 42-John
xxi. 25, and in other places. This copy is Scholz's Act. 190, Paul.
</p>

<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>

<p>
244, Apoc. 27, but unnumbered in the Gospels. Collated fully by
Scrivener in 1863. (Greg. 517.)
</p>

<p>
504. Oxf. Ch. Ch. Wake 36 [xii], 6 × 5, ff. 249-6 <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> (23), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> (Luke), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (Luke, John), <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> (Greg.
518.)
</p>

<p>
505. Oxf. Ch. Ch. Wake 39 [xiii], 5-¼ × 4-¼, ff. 308 (17 &amp;c.), κεφ., some
τίτλ., a poor copy, in several hands. (Greg. 567.)
</p>

<p>
506. Oxf. Ch. Ch. Wake. 40 [xii], 4-½ × 3-1/8, ff. 218 (22, 23), a beautiful
little copy. <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> in the faintest red, but no other
divisions. (Greg. 520.)<note place='foot'>Of these manuscripts Thomas Mangey (Evan. 483) states on the fly-leaves
that he collated Nos. 12, 25, 28, 34 in 1749. Caspar Wetstein collated the
Apocalypse in Nos. 12 and 34 for his relative's great edition; while in the
margin of No. 35, a 4to Greek Testament printed at Geneva (1620), is inserted
a most laborious collation (preceded by a full description) of eight of the Wake
manuscripts with Wetstein's N. T. of 1711, having this title prefixed to them,
<q>Hae Variae lectiones ex MSS. notatae sunt manu et opera Johannis Walkeri,
A. 1732.</q> John Walker, most of whose labours seem never yet to have been
used, although they were known to Berriman in 1741 (Critical Dissertation on
1 Tim. iii. 16, pp. 102-4), was Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, where so
many of his critical materials accumulated for the illustrious Bentley are
deposited. Walker d. 1741, Archdeacon of Hereford, after Bentley's will, six
months before him. The codd. in Trinity College were bought from Bentley's
heirs (not from Richard Bentley) when Wordsworth was Master (1820-41), and
so were not in Bentley's hands when Walker died. Old Latin Biblical Texts,
xxiv-vi. Of his eight codices, we find on investigation that Walker's C is
Wake 26; Walker's 1 is Wake 20 (collations of these two, sent by Walker to
Wetstein, comprise Codd. 73, 74, described above); Walker's B is Wake 21;
Walker's D is Wake 24, both of Gospels; Walker's E is Wake 18, his H is Wake
19, both Evangelistaria; Walker's q is Wake 12, of which Caspar Wetstein
afterwards examined the Apocalypse (Cod. 26); Walker's W is Wake 38 of the
Acts and Epistles, or Scholz's Act. 191, Paul. 245.</note>
</p>

<p>
F. H. A. Scrivener has published the following in his <q>Collation of
Greek Manuscripts of the Holy Gospels, 1853,</q> and <q>Codex Augiensis</q>
(Appendix), 1859.
</p>

<p>
*v<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> or cant<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. of Tischendorf. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Evan. 440 (Act. 111, Paul. 221
of Scholz; Evan. 236, Act. and Paul. 61 of Griesbach; Act. and Paul.
o<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>), in a minute hand, with many unusual readings, especially in the
Epistles, from Bp. Moore's Library. <hi rend='italic'>Men.</hi> Ὕποθέσεις Oecumenii to the
Catholic and first eight Pauline Epistles: beautifully written with many
contractions. This is Bentley's ο (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 51).
</p>

<p>
*507. w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. (Act. 224, Paul. 260.) Camb. Trin. Coll. B. x. 16 [dated
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1316], <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 7-¼ × 5, ff. 363 (28, 29), was inelegantly written by
a monk James on Mount Sinai. <hi rend='italic'>Prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>; also ὑποθέσεις, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> to
Epistles; and much extraneous matter<note place='foot'>Bentley specifies <q>argumenta inedita Cosmae Indicopleustae in 4 Evangelia,
et versus iambici fortasse Jacobi Calligraphi: argumenta incerti ad Actus:
prologus ineditus et argumenta Oecumenii ad Epistolas omnes.</q></note>. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Evan. 570. This is
Bentley's τ (Evan. 51), and, like i<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> which follows, came to him from
Παντοκράτωρ. Hort makes it his Cod. 102. (Greg. 489.)
</p>

<p>
*508. i<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. Camb. Trin. Coll. B. x. 17 [xiii], 8-½ × 6, ff. 317 (20), from
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
Athos, bequeathed to Trinity College by Bentley. Κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, and (on paper) are ὑπόθεσις to St. Matthew and <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>
This is Bentley's δ, who dates it <q>annorum 700</q> [xi], and adds <q>nuper
in monasterio Pantocratoris in monte Atho, nunc <hi rend='italic'>meus.</hi></q> (Greg. 477.)
</p>

<p>
*j<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. Evan. N.
</p>

<p>
*509. a<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. London, Lambeth 1175 [xi], 11-7/8 × 9-¾, ff. 220, five leaves
bound up with it (23-35), 2 cols. (23, 24), 2 cols., κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 1-13; once at Constantinople, but
brought (together with the next five) from the Greek Archipelago by
J. D. Carlyle, Professor of Arabic at Cambridge [d. 1804]. (Greg. 470.)
</p>

<p>
*510. b<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. Lond. Lamb. 1176 [xii], 7-¾ × 6, ff. 209 (24), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>chart</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>proll.</hi> at end, very
elegant. A copy <q>eximiae notae,</q> but with many corrections by a later
hand, and some foreign matter. (Greg. 471.)
</p>

<p>
*511. c<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. Lond. Lamb. 1177 [xi-xii], 7-½ × 5-5/8, ff. 210 (17 &amp;c.),
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> (Luke, John), <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, for valuable readings
by far the most important at Lambeth, shamefully ill written, torn
and much mutilated<note place='foot'>Matt. iv. 1-vii. 6; xx. 21-xxi. 12; Luke iv. 29-v. 1; 17-33; xvi. 24-xvii.
13; xx. 19-41; John vi. 51-viii. 2; xii. 20-40; xiv. 27-xv. 13; xvii. 6-xviii.
2; 37-xix. 14.</note>. (Greg. 472.)
</p>

<p>
*512. d<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. Lond. Lamb. 1178 [xi or xiv], 11-3/8 × 9-¼, ff. 302 (23), <hi rend='italic'>Syn.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, in a fine hand,
splendidly illuminated, and with much curious matter in the subscriptions.
<hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 1-8. A noble-looking copy. (Greg. 473.)
</p>

<p>
*513. e<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. Lond. Lamb. 1179 [x or later], 8-¾ × 6-¾, ff. 176 (24),
2 cols., τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, neatly written but in
wretched condition, beginning Matt. xiii. 53, ending John xiii. 8. Also
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> Matt. xvi. 28-xvii. 18; xxiv. 39-xxv. 9; xxvi. 71-xxvii. 14;
Mark viii. 32-ix. 9; John xi. 8-30. Carlyle brought it from Trinity
Monastery, Chalké. (Greg. 474.)
</p>

<p>
514. <hi rend='italic'>v</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. Constantinople, Library of Patriarch of Jerusalem, restored
from Lambeth in 1817, where it was No. 1180 [xiv], ff. 246, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, with important variations: collated by Dr. Charles
Burney in Mark i. 1-iv. 16; John vii. 53-viii. 11 (Lambeth 1223).
(Greg. 488.)
</p>

<p>
*515. f<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. Lond. Lamb. 1192 [xiii], 8 × 6-½, ff. 472-6, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> (22),
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>; from Syria, beautifully written,
but tampered with by a later hand. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> John xvi. 8-22, and a later
hand [xv] has supplied Mark iii. 6-21; Luke xii. 48-xiii. 2; John
xviii. 27-xxi. 25; at the beginning stand some texts, περὶ ἀνεξικακίας.
Re-examined by Bloomfield. About Luke xix, xx its readings agree
much with those of Evan. Δ, and those of the oldest uncials. (Greg.
475.)
</p>

<p>
(g<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> is Lamb. 528 and Evan. 71, described above.)
</p>

<p>
516. u<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. Constantin. Libr. Patr. of Jerus., C. 4 of Archdeacon
Todd's Lambeth Catalogue, was a copy of the Gospels, in the Carlyle
<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>
collection, restored with six others to the Patriarch of Jerusalem<note place='foot'>In Mr. Coxe's <q>Report to Her Majesty's Government,</q> we find an account
(which illness compelled him to give at second hand) of several copies of the
Gospels and one palimpsest Evangelistarium, all dated [xii], still remaining in
this Prelate's Library.</note>.
The collation of SS. Matthew and Mark by the Rev. G. Bennet is at
Lambeth (1255, No. 25). (Greg. 487.)
</p>

<p>
*517. t<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> Lond. Lamb. 1350 [xiv], 8-½ × 5-¾, ff. 51 (20), St. John on
paper, written with a reed, appended to a copy of John Damascene
<q>De Fide Orthodoxa:</q> has ὑπόθεσις or <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ., and a few rubrical
directions; carelessly written, and inscribed <q>T. Wagstaffe ex dono D.
Barthol. Cassano e sacerdotibus ecclesiae Graecae, Oct. 20, 1732.</q> (Greg.
486.)
</p>

<p>
518. Lond. Sion College Library, A. 32. 1 (Ev. 1. (3)), [xi], 11 × 8-3/8,
ff. 152 (24), a beautiful fragment, miserably injured by damp and past
neglect, consisting of 153 leaves preserved in a box, was given by <q>Mr.
Edward Payne, a tenant in Sion College, as were also Evst. 227, 228,
and perhaps Evst. 229.</q> The capitals, stops, and τίτλοι are in gold, κεφ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (no <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>) in red. Full <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀρχαί and τέλη in red. It begins at
Matt. x. 17, ends at John ix. 14. St. Mark's Gospel only has κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>
Mark i. 1-13; Luke i. 1-13; John i. 1-17 have been taken away for
the sake of the illuminations, and much of the text is illegible. (Greg.
559.)
</p>

<p>
519. Edinburgh, University Library, A. C. 25 [xi], 8vo, ff. 198, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, in bad condition, presented in
1650 by Sir John Chiesley. (Greg. 563.)
</p>

<p>
520. Glasgow, Hunterian Museum, V. vii. 2 [xii], 4to, ff. 367, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (Greg. 560.)
</p>

<p>
521. Glasg. Hunt. Mus. Q. 7, 10 [xi], 4to, ff. 291, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. t., κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> Both these were once Caesar de Missy's (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 44).
(Greg. 561.)
</p>

<p>
522. Glasg. Hunt. Mus. S. 8, 141 [xv], 4to, ff. 78, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Lat.</hi> Codd.
519-22 were first announced by Haenel (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> under Evan. 472). (Greg.
562.)
</p>

<p>
523. Lond., Mr. White, formerly Blenheim 3. B. 14 [xiii, Greg. xiv],
7-½ × 6-¼, ff. 170 (22), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>: like Apost. 52, once belonging to the Metropolitan Church of
Heraclea on the Propontis, and presented in 1738 to Charles, Duke of
Marlborough, <hi rend='italic'>amoris et observantiae ergo</hi> by Thomas Payne, Archdeacon
of Brecon, once our Chaplain at Constantinople: a bright, clean copy,
written in very black ink, with vermilion ornamentation, and barbarous
<hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (Greg. 701.)
</p>

<p>
Mr. Bradshaw indicated in the <q>Transactions of the Royal Society
of Literature,</q> vol. ii. p. 355, two copies of the Gospels belonging to the
Earl of Leicester at Holkham, to be described with facsimiles in the
Catalogue of the Library there. They were examined by Dean Burgon,
who thus reported of them:&mdash;
</p>

<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>

<p>
524. Holkham 3 [xiii], 8-¾ × 6-1/6, of 183 leaves, four being misplaced.
It is beautifully written in twenty-seven long lines on a page. <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not Eus.), imperfectly given: no <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>).
Besides five pictures of the Evangelists and gorgeous headings to the
Gospels are seventeen representations of Scripture subjects, some damaged.
This <q>superb MS. of extraordinary interest</q> in the style of its writing
closely resembles Evan. 38. (Greg. 557.)
</p>

<p>
525. Holkham 4 [xiii or earlier], 8-½ × 6-1/3, ff. 352 (20), finely written,
but quite different in style from Cod. 524. Τίτλ. in gold, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀρχαί and
τέλη in vermilion, κεφ., στίχ. numbered. (Κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ.,
<hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>) (Greg. 558.)
</p>

<p>
Eight copies of the Gospels, brought together by the late Sir Thomas
Phillipps, Bart., at Middle Hill, Worcestershire, are now the property
of Mr. Fitzroy Fenwick, and, with the rest of this unrivalled private
collection of manuscripts, are now at Thirlestaine House, Cheltenham,
where Burgon examined them in 1880, and Hoskier in 1886, who quotes
(Cod. 604, App. E), some of the readings. Scrivener had used some of
them at Middle Hill in 1856.
</p>

<p>
526. Phillipps 13,975 [xii], 12-½ × 9-½, ff. 196, once Lord Strangford's
464, a grand copy, the text being surrounded with a commentary (abounding,
as usual, in contractions) in very minute letters. That on St. Mark
is Victor's. <hi rend='italic'>Pict.</hi> of SS. Mark and Luke, beautiful illuminations for
headings of the Gospels. Κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> in gold, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>
at end). (Greg. 556.)
</p>

<p>
527. Phillipps 1284 (Act. 200, Paul. 281) [xii], 7-2/3 × 5-¼, ff. 344 (28),
from the library of Mr. Lammens of Ghent, a rough specimen, contains
the Gospels, Acts, and Epistles, the Pauline preceding the Catholic.
<hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. ix. 36-x. 22; Mark i. 21-45, and the first page of St. John.
The writing varies; that from Acts to 1 Thess. is more delicate, and looks
older. No <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> Much <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> in vermilion, ἀρχαί and τέλη. Τίτλ.,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, and sparse <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> (Greg. 676.)
</p>

<p>
528. Phillipps 2387 [xiii], 6-¼ × 4-½, ff. 222 (25), bought of Thorpe for
thirty guineas: rough, but interesting. One leaf only of <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi> Wantonly
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> in headings of the Gospels, and in Mark i. 1-19; Luke i. 1-18;
John i. 1-23. Κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), ἀρχαί and τέλη later, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>
(xvii) at the beginning, and much marginal <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> by a modern hand.
</p>

<p>
529. Phillipps 3886 [xi or xii], 10-½ × 8-1/8, ff. 326 (20), a beautiful copy,
bought (as were Evann. 530, 532, 533) by Payne at Lord Guildford's sale.
<hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀρχ., τέλη, ἀναγν. later).
(Greg. 678.)
</p>

<p>
530. Phillipps 3887 [xii], 8-¼ × 6, ff. 240 (25, 26), the first four lines
in SS. Matt., Mark, Luke being of gold, with <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> of the four Evangelists
and nineteen others, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> incomplete and irregular (no <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>).
No <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, but marginal critical notes. As in Evan. 64, a line (~) is set
over Proper Names of persons in the Genealogies (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> at end of Evan. 64).
(Greg. 679.)
</p>

<p>
531. (Acts 199, Paul. 231, Apoc. 104.) Phillipps 7682 [xi], 6-5/8 × 5,
ff. 190 (41 or 50), 2 cols. (two scribes, Hoskier; several, Greg.), the hands
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
so minute as to require a magnifying glass, contains the whole New
Testament, also from Lord Guildford's (871), being, like Evann. 532
and 583, to be described below, from the Hon. F. North's collection
(319). The ink is a dull brown, the ornaments in blue, vermilion, and
carmine. <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ. (Gr. and Lat.), τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, few
<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> There are many important corrections in the margin,
and 18-½ pages from Epiphanius at the end. This copy has every
appearance of having been made from a very ancient codex: observe the
arrangement of the Beatitudes in Matt. v in single lines, as also the
genealogy in Luke iii. (Greg. 680.)
</p>

<p>
532. Phillipps 7712, North 184 (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 529), [xiii], 7-½ × 5-½, ff. ?,
in a large hand and very black ink, the first page being in gold, with
many gold balls for stops. There is much preliminary matter, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>
(two sets in different hands), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> later), κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (later), <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. The text is corrected throughout
by an ancient scribe, in a hand bright, clear, and small. (Greg. 681.)
</p>

<p>
533. Phillipps 7757 [xi], 6 × 4-½, ff. ?, an exquisite little manuscript,
with accessories in lake, vermilion, and blue. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Evan. 529. <hi rend='italic'>Prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Haenel is mistaken in supposing that a Greek Evangelistarium is
included in this grand and unique collection.
</p>

<p>
The Parham copies of the New Testament are described in a <q>Catalogue
of materials for writing, early writings on tablets and stones, rolled and
other Manuscripts and Oriental Manuscript books in the library of
Robert Curzon (Lord de la Zouche of Harynworth, 1870-73) at Parham,</q>
fol., 1849. This accomplished person collected them in the course of his
visits to Eastern Monasteries from 1834 to 1837, and permitted me in
1855 to collate thoroughly three of them, and to inspect the rest. They
were all examined by Dean Burgon, to whom his son, the present Lord
de la Zouche, had given free access to them. The codices of the Gospels
are eight in number.
</p>

<p>
534. (Act. 215, Paul. 233.) Parham lxxi. 6 [xi], 9 × 6-½, ff. 348 (41),
contains the Gospels, Acts, and Epistles, the Pauline preceding the
Catholic, and was brought in 1837 from Caracalla on Athos. <hi rend='italic'>Prol.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (ἀρχ. and τέλ.), ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>
The usual arabesque ornaments are in red. (Greg. 547.)
</p>

<p>
535. Parh. lxxi. 7 [xi, Greg. x], 6-1/8 × 4-½, ff. 167 (26), brought from
St. Saba in 1834. <hi rend='italic'>Pict.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, illuminated headings, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not
<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>). <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> John xvi. 27-xix. 40. There is a musical notation on the
first four leaves, and the first nine lines of St. John are in gold.
(Greg. 548.)
</p>

<p>
536. Parh. lxxiii. 8 [xi], 4to, 11 × 9, ff. 198, brought from Xenophon
on Athos 1837. The text is surrounded by a commentary, that on St.
Mark being Victor's. <hi rend='italic'>Prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (ἀρχ. and τέλ.), <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> (Greg. 549.)
</p>

<p>
537. Parh. lxxiv. 9 [xi, Greg. xii], 10-¼ × 7-¾, ff. 219 (28), brought
from Caracalla 1837, in its old black binding. <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> (later), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (ἀρχ. and τέλ.), <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> With
faded red arabesques (no <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>) and lake headings to the Gospels, the
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
writing being large and spread. There are marginal notes here and
there. (Greg. 550.)
</p>

<p>
538. Parh. lxxv. 10 [xii], 4to, ff. 233 (22, 23), from Caracalla, also in
its old black binding. There are rude <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> of the four Evangelists, and
barbarous headings to the Gospels. Κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, few <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> later). The number of <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, κεφ.
varies from what is usual. (Greg. 551.)
</p>

<p>
539. Parh. lxxvi. 11 [xii], 4to, ff. 252 (27), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> (Luke), κεφ., τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, ἀρχ. and τέλ., brought from St. Saba in 1834. Rough illuminations.
It contains some rare and even unique readings. (Greg. 552.)
</p>

<p>
540. Parh. lxxvii. 12 [xiii], 8-½ × 6, ff. 304 (21), brought from St.
Saba in 1834. Externally uninteresting, with decorations in faded lake,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. (Greg. 553.)
</p>

<p>
541. Parh. lxxviii. 13 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1272], 5-¾ × 4-½, ff. 230 (21). A facsimile
is given in the Catalogue. This <q>singularly rough little object</q> was
bought at St. Saba in 1834 for ten dollars. Κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (Greg.
554.)
</p>

<p>
*542. l<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. (Act. 188, Paul. 258.) Wordsworth [xiii], 4to, ff. 231,
was bought in 1837 by Dr. Christopher Wordsworth, Bishop of Lincoln,
and bears a stamp <q>Bibliotheca Suchtelen</q> (Russian Ambassador at
Stockholm). Κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> or ὑποθέσεις are prefixed
to the Epistles, and scholia of Chrysostom, &amp;c. set in the margin.
(Greg. 479.)
</p>

<p>
*543. q<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. (Act. 187, Paul. 257.) Theodori, from the name of the
scribe [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1295], 8vo, ff. 360, passed from Caesar de Missy into the
Duke of Sussex's library: in 1845 it belonged to the late Wm. Pickering,
the much-respected bookseller: its present locality is unknown. <hi rend='italic'>Syn.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ὑποθέσεις or <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> before
Act. and all Epp., Euthalius περὶ χρόνων, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> after St. Jude; it has
many later changes made in the text. (Greg. 483.)
</p>

<p>
544. Ashburnham 204 [xiii], 4to, ff. 104, <q>a piteous fragment,</q> brought
from Greece by the Earl of Aberdeen, and bought at his sale. It contains
only Matt. xxv. 32-5, 40, 41-xxviii. 20; Mark i. 4-xv. 47 (but
defective throughout); Luke i. 1-xxiv. 48; John i. 1-ii. 4: about Luke
vi a different hand was employed. There is no heading to St. Luke's
Gospel, but a blank space is left, so that perhaps the MS. was never
finished. Κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> (partially). (Greg. 671.)
</p>

<p>
The Baroness Burdett-Coutts imported in 1870-2 from Janina in
Epirus upwards of one hundred manuscripts, chiefly Greek and theological,
among which are sixteen copies of the Gospels or parts of them, three of
the Acts, two of the Catholic, and three of St. Paul's Epistles, one of the
Apocalypse, sixteen Evangelistaria and five Praxapostoli. Those marked
I and II are deposited in the Library of Sir Roger Cholmely's School,
Highgate; those marked III are in the Baroness's possession. The
copies of the Gospels are&mdash;
</p>

<p>
*545. B.-C. I. 3 [xii], 7-3/8 × 5-5/8, ff. ? <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> John x. 1-xii. 10; xv. 24-xxi.
25. <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>
(Greg. 532.)
</p>

<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>

<p>
*546. B.-C. I. 4 [xii], 6-¾ × 5-3/8, ff. ?, a fine copy. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 1-ix. 13,
with gilded illuminations. <hi rend='italic'>Syn.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>,
iambic verses. (Greg. 533.)
</p>

<p>
*547. B.-C. I. 7 [xiii], 6 × 4, ff. 267 (22), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Luke. i. 26-42;
xx. 16-xxi. 24. <hi rend='italic'>Syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>).
After the subscription to St. John follow the numerals ξ θ ο π. It has
on the cover a curious metal tablet adorned with figures and a superscription.
(Greg. 534.)
</p>

<p>
*548. B.-C. I. 9 [xii], 7 × 5, ff. 125 (18), SS. Matthew and Mark only.
<hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. xi. 28-xiii. 34; xviii. 13-xxi. 15; 33-xxii. 10; xxiv. 46-xxv.
21; Mark iii. 11-v. 31; ix. 18-xii. 6; 34-44; ends with
πανταχοῦ Mark xvi. 20. <hi rend='italic'>Syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> (Greg. 535.)
</p>

<p>
*549. B.-C. II. 7 [xii or xiii], 5 × 3, ff. 172 (26-31), a very curious
volume in ancient binding with two metal plates on the covers much
resembling that of B-C. I. 7, contains the Four Gospels and the Acts,
breaking off at ch. xxvi. 24 μαίνῃ παῦλε; the writing being unusually full
of abbreviations, and the margin gradually contracting, as if vellum was
becoming scarce. The last five pages are in another, though contemporary
hand. Seven pages containing Gregory Nazianzen's heroic verses
on the Lord's genealogy, and others on His miracles and parables, partly
in red, precede κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> to St. Matthew; other such verses of Gregory
precede SS. Mark and Luke, and follow St. John, and κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> stand
before SS. Luke and John. There are τίτλ., κεφ. (no <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>; and <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, only in the open leaf containing Luke xii): in the Gospels there
is a <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, and no chapter divisions in the Acts, but a few capitals in red.
Pretty illuminations precede each book. (Greg. 536.)
</p>

<p>
*550. B.-C. II. 13 [xii], 7 × 5, ff. 143 (29), with poor arabesque
ornamentation, complete. <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, a few τίτλ. by a later hand, as is also
much of <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, which are only partially inserted. (Greg. 537.)
</p>

<p>
*551. B.-C. II. 16 [xiii], 6-7/8 × 4-7/8, ff. ? <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 1-17; Luke i. 1-17;
John i. 1-46. <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> (defective), τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
(Greg. 539.)
</p>

<p>
*552. B.-C. II. 18 [xii], 6 × 4-3/8, ff. ?, very neat. The first leaf forms part
of a Lectionary: on the second the Gospels begin with Matt. xiii. 7. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi>
John i. 1-15. Κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> at the end, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> in
abundance, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> of St. Mark washed out: arabesques at the head of each
book. (Greg. 538.)
</p>

<p>
*553 &amp; *554. B.-C. II. 26<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi> and 26<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> are two fragments of the Gospels,
whereof 26<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi> comprises 27 leaves of St. Mark (19-21), covered with vile
modern scribbling (ch. iii. 21-iv. 13; 37-vii. 29; viii. 15-27; ix.
9-x. 5; 29-xii. 32) [xiii], 7-½ × 5-½, neat, with τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>;
and 26<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> consists of 48 leaves [xiv], 8-½ × 5-½, containing Matt. xviii. 32-xxiv.
10; xxvi. 28-xxviii. 20; Mark i. 16-xiii. 9; xiv. 9-27, with
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> only partially), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> There are many abridgements
in the writing. Dated, perhaps by the first hand, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1323.
(Greg. 540, 541.)
</p>

<p>
*555. B.-C. III. 4 [xiii], 7 × 5, ff. 264 (24), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., Κεφ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> of the four Evangelists, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> incomplete at the end.
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
Some leaves are misplaced in St. Matthew. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> John xix. 25-xxi. 2.
(Greg. 542.)
</p>

<p>
*556. B.-C. III. 5 [xii], 11 × 8-½ ff. 183 (26), 2 cols., κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. xii. 11-xiii. 10; Mark viii.
4-28; Luke xv. 20-xvi. 9; John ii. 22-iv. 6; 53-v. 43; xi. 21-47,
one leaf lost in each case, and one (John i. 51-ii. 22) misplaced in
binding. This copy has John vii. 53-viii. 11 after Luke xxi. 38, like
Ferrar's four, with which its text much agrees, and the titles to SS. Matthew
and Mark only run εὐαγγέλιον ἐκ τοῦ κατὰ M ... (Greg. 543.)
</p>

<p>
*557. B.-C. III. 9 [xiii], 5-½ × 3-½, ff. 256 (22), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> to the last three
Gospels, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> of SS. Matthew, Mark, and John.
This copy is remarkably free from <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> Neatly written, but four considerable
passages in St. Luke are omitted, the text running on <foreign rend='italic'>uno
tenore</foreign>. (Greg. 544.)
</p>

<p>
*558. B.-C. III. 10 [dated <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1430], 8 × 5-½, ff. 374 (+ 16 + 34) (16),
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> of the four Evangelists, of the Saviour, and of the Virgin and
Child. <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi> The leaves are
much misplaced in binding. (Greg. 545.)
</p>

<p>
*559. B.-C. III. 41 [xii or xiii], 6-½ × 4-½, ff. 275 (22). <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> at beginning
and end (John xviii. 30-end) and about Matt. xii. 16. Κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, in a bad condition. (Greg. 546.)
</p>

<p>
The next two were purchased in 1876 of Quaritch for £120 and £50
respectively by Mr. Jonathan Peckover, and now belong to Miss Algerina
Peckover, of Bank House, Wisbech. Burgon examined them, and J. R.
Harris since then.
</p>

<p>
560. (Act. 222, Paul. 278.) Algerina Peckover (1) [xi], small 4to,
ff. 239 (33), contains the Gospels, Acts, and Epistles in their usual
Greek order, <q>an exquisite specimen, in a somewhat minute character.</q>
It begins with a picture of St. Matthew, the lost preliminary matter
being prefixed <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> by a later hand. <hi rend='italic'>Pict.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (ἀρχ. and τέλ.), <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> On the last leaf is
written in uncial letters: ὡς ἡδὺς τοῖς πλέουσιν ὁ εὔδιος λιμήν; | οὕτως καὶ
τοῖς γράφουσιν ὁ ἔσχατος στίχος. ἰωαννικίου μοναχοῦ.  (Greg. 712.)
</p>

<p>
561.  Algerina Peckover (2), [xi or a little later], 7-3/8 × 5-¾, ff. 356 (16),
with 17 (3 + 14) uncial palimpsest leaves at the beginning and end,
containing Lessons from the Epistles to be described hereafter (Apost. 43).
<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> (later), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (ἀρχ. and τέλ.),
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> (later). <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. xxvii. 43, 44; John vii. 53-viii.
11; x. 27-xi. 14 (2 ff.); xi. 29-42 (1 f.). Marg. notes, Matt. v. 14;
xvi. 15. One of the Ferrar group. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> J. R. Harris, Codex Algerina
Peckover (Journal of Exegetical Society). (Greg. 713.)
</p>

<p>
*562. Oxf. Bodl. MS. Bibl. Gr. L. 1. Mendham [xiv], 9-½ × 7, ff. 270
[sic] (20), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>
Bohn became possessed of it, whether from Meerman or not is not known,
and sold it to the Rev. Theodore Williams, Vicar of Hendon, for £120.
The Rev. Joseph Mendham bought it of Payne for £70 in 1827. It was
given by Mr. Mendham's widow to Dean Burgon for his life, afterwards
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
to go to the Bodleian Library, where the Rev. W. F. Rose brought it
upon the Dean's death. It is dated on the last leaf by a later hand, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1322. It is evenly written in pale brown ink with a reed-pen. The last
twenty leaves contain the Gospels for Maundy Thursday, for Good
Friday, and for St. John's Day. The ornamentation is as fresh and bright
as if done yesterday, and its text is of the ordinary type, like lmn<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>
(Evann. 201, 542, 568). It is a very beautiful MS., and an excellent
specimen in all ways. (Greg. 521.)
</p>

<p>
Mr. James Woodhouse [d. 1866], Treasurer-General of the Ionian
Islands, while resident fifty years at Corfu, formed a collection of manuscripts
from monasteries in the Levant, which was sold in London in
1869, 1872, 1875. Among them were three copies of the Gospels, two
Evangelistaria, one copy of the Acts and St. Paul.
</p>

<p>
*563. London, Brit. Mus. Egerton 2783 [xiii], 5-3/8 × 3-½, ff. 337 (22), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (ἀρχαί and τέλη), <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ.,
<hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> It was once fair, but has suffered from damp, and has
been sadly cropped by the Western binder. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> John xx. 17. The
headings of the Gospels are in lake. It abounds in curious and unique
liturgical notes, whereof Burgon gives specimens, and it has textual
corrections by the original scribe. Collated by Rose. Bought by Burgon,
then belonged to Rev. W. F. Rose, and bought for the Museum in 1893.
(Greg. 714.)
</p>

<p>
*564. Brit. Mus. Egerton 2785 [xiv], 10-½ × 8, ff. 226 (27-29), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, scholium on τίτλος α´, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ. (<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>
later), <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, ῥήμ., στίχ. The ornamentation is in lake, and at the end
are extracts from Eulogius and Hesychius. Upon collation by Mr. Rose
it exhibits here and there suggestive discrepancies from the common text.
Evann. 563, 564 were respectively offered for sale in 1871 for £50 and
£40. Bought by Burgon, belonged to Rose, and purchased for Museum
in 1893. (Greg. 715.)
</p>

<p>
*565. Brit. Mus. Egerton 2784 [xii, Greg. xiv], 8-3/8 × 5-¾, ff. 213 (22-25),
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, ῥήμ., στίχ., fragment of <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>
Apparently not from the Woodhouse collection. It is beautifully written
and of an uncommon type. Its older binding suggests a Levantine origin.
The readings are far more interesting than those of Cod. 564, some of
them being quite unique. Belonged to Burgon, then Rose, then to the
Museum in 1893. (Greg. 716.)
</p>

<p>
*566. h<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. Brit. Mus. Arund. 524 [xi], 6-¾ × 5-¼, ff. 218 (27), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, was brought to
England (with x<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> and many others) by the great Earl of Arundel in
1646. Henry Howard, Evelyn's Duke of Norfolk, presented them to the
Royal Society, from whose rooms at Somerset House they were transferred
to the Museum in 1831. (Greg. 476.)
</p>

<p>
567. Brit. Mus. Harl. 5538, described in the Harleian Catalogue as an
Evangelistarium, and numbered by Scholz Evst. 149, is a copy of the
Gospels [xiv, Greg. xii], 4-¾ × 3-½, ff. 226 (23), <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (Greg. 505.)
</p>

<p>
*568. n<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. (Paul. 259 or j<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>.) Brit. Mus., Burney 18 (purchased in
1818, with many other manuscripts, from the heirs of Dr. Charles
<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
Burney), contains the Gospels and two leaves of St. Paul (Hebr. xii.
17-xiii. 25), written by one Joasaph <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1366, 12-¾ × 9, ff. 222 (23)
+ 9 blank, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., very superb
in gold letters. Codd. lmn (542, 201, 568) agree pretty closely. (Greg.
480.)
</p>

<p>
*569. o<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. Brit. Mus. Burn. 19 [x], 8-½ × 7, ff. 217 (22), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (Plate
<ref target='Plate_III'>iii</ref>, No. 8), in the Escurial as late as 1809, is singularly void of the usual
apparatus. (Greg. 481.)
</p>

<p>
*570. p<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. Brit. Mus. Burn. 20 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1285, Indict. 13, altered into
985, whose indiction is the same], 7-½ × 6, ff. 317 (22, 23), written by a
monk Theophilus: <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>,
the two last in a later hand, which has made many corrections: this
copy is quite equal in value to Cod. c<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> (511), and often agrees closely
with w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> (507). (Greg. 482.)
</p>

<p>
*571. r<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. Brit. Mus. Burn. 21, by the same scribe as Cod. 543 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1292], 13 × 10, ff. 258 (24), on cotton paper in a beautiful but formed
hand (see Plate <ref target='Plate_VI'>vi</ref>, No. 15), <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> A fine copy, much damaged. Codd. 543 and 571
differ only in 183 places. (Greg. 484.)
</p>

<p>
*572. s<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. Brit. Mus. Burn. 23 [xii], 7-¾ × 6, ff. 230 (23-25), boldly
but carelessly written, ends John viii. 14: <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> Luke v. 22-ix. 32; xi.
31-xiii. 25; xvii. 24-xviii. 4. <hi rend='italic'>Syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., with many later changes and weighty readings.
(Greg. 485.)
</p>

<p>
573. Brit. Mus. Add. 5468 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1338], 8-¼ × 6, ff. 226 (29), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.
t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> It was <q>John
Jackson's book, bought of Conant in Fleet Street, 1777, for five guineas.</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 1-vi. 18, and the last leaf of St. Luke (xxiv. 47-53). This
copy has the subscriptions at the end of each of the Gospels of SS.
Matthew and Mark. There is a probable reference to them at the end of
St. John (ὁμοίως). It is coarsely written on thick vellum, with much
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> in vermilion. The breathings and accents are remarkably incorrect.
(Greg. 686.)
</p>

<p>
574. Brit. Mus. Add. 7141, bought 1825, and once Claudius James
Rich's [xiii, Greg. xi], 9-¾ × 7-½, ff. 192 (27), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (partial), <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> in red, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> (Greg. 490.)
</p>

<p>
*575 or k<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. Brit. Mus. Add. 11,300, Lebanon [xii], 6-¾ × 4-½, ff. 268
(26), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, most elegantly
and correctly written, purchased in 1838, and said to come from
Caesarea Philippi at the foot of Lebanon. Contains <hi rend='italic'>scholia</hi>: the text is
broken up into paragraphs. (Re-examined by Bloomfield.) There is
a beautiful facsimile page in the new <q>Catalogue of Ancient Manuscripts
in the British Museum</q> (1881), Plate 16. (Greg. 478.)
</p>

<p>
576. (Act. 226, Paul. 268.) Brit. Mus. Add. 11,836, this and the next
two are from Bishop Butler's collection: [xi], 7-¼ × 5-¼, ff. 305 (34), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>
(blank), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, κεφ. in Epistles, beautifully
written in a minute hand and adorned with gold letters, contains Evan.,
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
Act., Cath., Paul., Psalms, &amp;c. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Mark i. 1-28; Acts i. 1-23; vii. 8-39;
Ps. i. 1-3. Akin to Cod. 440 in St. Paul (Vansittart). (Greg. 491.)
</p>

<p>
577. Brit. Mus. Add. 11,838<note place='foot'>For Add. 11,837, which is m<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>, see Evan. *201.</note> [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1326, Ind. 9], 9-¼ × 6, ff. 269 (24),
(<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> later), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, some ἀναγν. later), τίτλ., from Sinai,
most beautifully written by Constantine, a monk. (Greg. 492.)
</p>

<p>
578. Brit. Mus. Add. 11,839 [xv], 10-½ × 8, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, ff. 157 (27), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>
(later, and in latter part), ill-written, with later marginal notes, and no
chapter divisions. Matt. iv. 13-xi. 27; Mark i. 1-vi. 1, are later.
(Greg. 493.)
</p>

<p>
579. Brit. Mus. Add. 11,868, from the Butler collection [xi], 9-½ × 7,
ff. 7 (29), 2 cols, (now bound separately), containing Matt. x. 33-xi. 12;
xiii. 44-xiv. 6; xv. 14-18; 20-22; 26-29; 30-32; 34-xvii. 10;
34-xvii. 10; 12-15; 18-20; 22-24; 25 (sic)-xviii. 16, two half-leaves
being lost, beautifully written in two columns. Κεφ., τίτλ. (<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>),
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, later <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (Greg. 687.)
</p>

<p>
580. See Evan. 272. Instead&mdash;
</p>

<p>
Lord Herries [xiii], 8-½ × 6-1/8, f. 1 (26), κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν.
later). (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 576.)
</p>

<p>
581. Brit. Mus. Add. 16,183 (sic) [xii], 6-½ × 5-¾, ff. 181 (28, 29), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at beg.), space for <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, in a minute hand, bought (as was Cod. 582) of Captain C. K.
Macdonald in 1846. The two came probably from Sinai, where he once
saw Cod. א. (Greg. 495.)
</p>

<p>
582. (Act. 227, Paul. 279.) Brit. Mus. Add. 16,184 [xiii or xiv], 7-½ ×
5-½, ff. 300 (33, 34), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>,
στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, some later on paper. The whole New Testament,
except the Apocalypse, in the usual Greek order. This copy contains
many important various readings: e.g. it countenances Codd. אBL in
Luke xi. 2, 4. (Greg. 496.)
</p>

<p>
583. Brit. Mus. Add. 16,943 [xi], 6 × 4-¾, ff. 184 (22, 23), in a very
small hand, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, from the collection made by the Hon. F. North for the
University of Corfu. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Evann. 531-2; Act. 198. (Greg. 497.)
</p>

<p>
584. (Act. 228, Paul. 269, Apoc. 97 or j<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>.) Brit. Mus. Add. 17,469,
contains the whole N. T., bought of T. Rodd in 1848 [xiv], 10-¼ × 7,
ff. 187 (35) (very minute writing), with much other matter. <hi rend='italic'>Prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, syn. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 1-ii. 13; Mark v. 2-vi.
11; Acts i. 1-v. 2; James i. 1-v. 4; 3 John; Jude; Rom. i. 1-iv. 9;
2 Thess. ii. 13-1 Tim. i. 13; vi. 19-2 Tim. ii. 19. In Acts τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>
rubro. <hi rend='italic'>Prol.</hi> to every Epistle. Written by Gerasimus. (Greg. 498.)
</p>

<p>
585. Brit. Mus. Add. 17,470 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1034], 8 × 6, ff. 287 (20), <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> (with <hi rend='italic'>harm.</hi>), κεφ., τίτλ. (with <hi rend='italic'>harm.</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>,
with many marginal corrections of the text. Written by Synesius,
a priest, bought of H. Rodd in 1848. <q>A singularly genuine specimen.</q>
(Greg. 504.)
</p>

<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>

<p>
586. Brit. Mus. Add. 17,741 [xii], 9-¼ × 6-¼, ff. 216 (22), begins Matt.
xii. 21, ends John xvii. 13: purchased in 1849. <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), ἀρχαί
and τέλη, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> The genealogy in St. Luke is in three columns. (Greg. 499.)
</p>

<p>
587. Brit. Mus. Add. 17,982 [xiii], 8 × 6, ff. 244 (23), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, space
for <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, ending John
xix. 39 (eight leaves being lost, also leaf containing xviii. 1-21), and
believed to contain important readings. (Greg. 500.)
</p>

<p>
588. Brit. Mus. Add. 18,211 [xiii], 9-½ × 7-½, ff. 157 (23), 12 <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
[xv] to supply hiatus: κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, some τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, came from
Patmos. F. V. J. Arundell, British Chaplain at Smyrna (1834), describes
this copy, given him by Mr. Borrell, and a Lectionary sold to him at the
same time, in his <q>Discoveries in Asia Minor,</q> vol. ii. p. 268. He there
compares it with the beautiful Cod. Ebnerianus (Evan. 105), which it
very slightly resembles, being larger and far less elegant. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i.
1-19; Mark i. 1-16; Luke ix. 14-xvii. 4; xxi. 19-John iv. 5.
(Greg. 501.)
</p>

<p>
589. Brit. Mus. Add. 19,387 [xii], 8-¼ × 6-½, ff. 235 (22), κεφ., τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, written by one Leo, and
found in a monastery of St. Maximus, begins Matt. viii. 6, and was purchased
in 1853 from the well-known Constantine Simonides (Greg. 502)&mdash;as
was also
</p>

<p>
590. Brit. Mus. Add. 19,389 [xiii], 4-¾ × 3-½, ff. 60 (26), κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, St. John's Gospel only, elegantly written by Cosmas Vanaretus,
a monk. (Greg. 503.)
</p>

<p>
The foregoing Additional MSS. in the British Museum were examined
and collated (apparently only in select passages) by Dr. S. T. Bloomfield
for his <q>Critical Annotations on the Sacred Text</q> (1860), designed as
a Supplement to the ninth edition of his Greek Testament, and comprising
an <foreign rend='italic'>opus supremum et ultimum</foreign>, the last effort of a long and
honourable literary career. He has passed under review no less than
seventy manuscripts of the New Testament, twenty-three at Lambeth,
the rest in the British Museum. The following have been accumulated
since his time.
</p>

<p>
591. Brit. Mus. Add. 22,506 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1305], 9-½ × 7, ff. 279 (22), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., ἀναγν., written by Neophytus a monk
of Cyprus, was bought at Milos by H. O. Coxe of a Greek who had it from
a relative who had been ἡγούμενος of a Candian monastery. A facsimile
is given in the new Museum Catalogue. (Greg. 645.)
</p>

<p>
592. Brit. Mus. Add. 22,736 [June, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1179], 9-½ × 7-½, ff. 226 (24),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, written by John
ἀναγνωστης, with peculiar, almost barbarous, illuminations. (Greg. 688.)
</p>

<p>
593. Brit. Mus. Add. 22,737 [xii], 8-¼ × 6, ff. 313 (20), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
not τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, with decorations in very deep
lake. (Greg. 689.)
</p>

<p>
594. Brit. Mus. Add. 22,738 [xiii], 6-¾ × 4-5/8, ff. 237 (23, 24), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ. (τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, by another hand), <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, rough and abounding with itacisms. Two rude pictures of Evangelists
have been effaced. (Greg. 690.)
</p>

<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>

<p>
595. Brit. Mus. Add. 22,739, has a rather modern look [xiv ?], 7-3/8 × 5-3/8,
ff. 275 (22), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, στίχ., ἀναγν.,
with rough pictures and illuminations. (Greg. 691.)
</p>

<p>
596. Brit. Mus. Add. 22,740 [xii], 8 × 6, ff. 237 (23), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> (in blue), exquisitely written, said to greatly
resemble Cod. 71 (g<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>) in text, with illuminated headings to the Gospels.
<hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Luke ii. 7-21, and after τίτλ. of St. John. This MS. with Evst.
269, 270, 271, 272, and Evann. 592, 597, was bought of Sp. Lampros of
Athens in 1859. (Greg. 692.)
</p>

<p>
597. Brit. Mus. Add. 22,741 [xiv], 10 × 7-¾, ff. 208 (22), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> (here called προγράμματα, a
term we have not noticed elsewhere). <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Mark i. 27-43; ii. 2-16;
John vii. 1-xxi. 25. (Greg. 693.)
</p>

<p>
598. Brit. Mus. Add. 24,112 [xv], 11-½ × 8-½, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, ff. 211 (33, 34),
(7-¼ pages Gr. and Lat.), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> Bought at Puttick's, 1861. (Greg. 694.)
</p>

<p>
599. Brit. Mus. Add. 24,373 [xiii], 9-¼ × 7-½, ff. 299 (22), <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>,
very beautiful. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 11-xv. 19. Long <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀρχ. in marg.,
τέλ. in the text. Bought of H. S. Freeman, Consul at Janina, in 1862.
(Greg. 695.)
</p>

<p>
600. Brit. Mus. Add. 24,376 [xiv], 10-¾ × 8-¼, ff. 350 (19), 2 cols., κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., some <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> Remarkable
<hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> of the Annunciation and of the three later Evangelists, Gospel
headings left blank. See Evst. 273-7. (Greg. 696.)
</p>

<p>
601. Brit. Mus. Add. 26,103 [xiv], 8 × 6, ff. 242 (25), <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (in gold), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (John), was found in a village near Corinth, and
bought of C. L. Merlin, our Vice-Consul at Athens, in 1865. Beautifully
written in very black ink, the first page of each Gospel being in gold.
(Greg. 697.)
</p>

<p>
602. Brit. Mus. Add. 27,861 [xiv], 6-½ × 5, ff. 186 (19, 20, &amp;c.), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, from Sir T. Gage's sale, 1868,
rough and dirty, with many marginal notes to supply omissions. St.
Matthew's Gospel is wholly lost. No <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, but ornamentation in faded
lake. (Greg. 698.)
</p>

<p>
603. (Act. 231, Paul. 266 and 271.) Brit. Mus. Add. 28,815 [x or
xi], 11-½ × 8-½, ff. 302 (30), κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, sumptuously
bound with silver-gilt plates. This noble fragment was bought (as
were Act. 232, Evst. 279, 280) of Sir Ivor B. Guest in 1871, and
contains the Gospels, Acts, Catholic Epistles, Romans, 1, 2 Corinthians,
Galatians, the rest of the original volume being evidently torn out
of the book when already bound. In the same year 1871 the Baroness
Burdett-Coutts also imported from Janina in Epirus sixty-seven leaves
containing the rest of St. Paul's Epistles and the Apocalypse (B.-C.
II. 4, Paul. 266, Apoc. 89), which fragments were described in the
second edition of the present book. Mr. Edward A. Guy, of Miami
University, Oxford, Ohio, U.S.A., on examining the Museum fragment
in 1875 with my book in his hand, concluded that the two portions
originally formed one magnificent copy of the whole New Testament,
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
and when I brought the two together, I saw that the illuminated
heading and initial capital on the first page of B.-C. II. 4 (Eph. i)
was worked off through damp on the <foreign rend='italic'>verso</foreign> of the last leaf (302)
of the Museum copy, and the red κεφ. of Gal. vi on the top of
B.-C. II. 4, leaf one, <foreign rend='italic'>recto</foreign>. In the larger fragment we find two
<hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> of St. Luke (one of them before the Acts), one of St. John, with
illuminated headings. <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, &amp;c. must have perished, as the
first page opens with Matt. i. 1. It has τίτλ. in gold letters on purple
vellum, a Harmony at the foot of fol. 17 b-18 b, and many brief
marginal scholia. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Paul. 266 (B.-C. II. 4), which is at present five
miles off, in the Library of Sir Roger Cholmeley's School, Highgate.
(Greg. 699.)
</p>

<p>
604. Brit. Mus. Egerton 2610 [xii], 5-¾ × 4-¼, ff. 297 (19), about thirty
letters to a line, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> (Matt., Mark, Luke), τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (beautifully executed). First noticed by Dean Burgon,
bought for the Museum in 1882, and collated by Mr. H. C. Hoskier,
<q>Full Account, &amp;c.,</q> D. Nutt, 1890. According to Mr. Hoskier's
analysis it contains no less than 270 quite unique readings, siding at
least twenty times alone with D, eleven with B, six with א, six with
Evan. 1, twenty-nine with Evan. 473. It has 2724 variations from T. R.
There are besides a vast number of almost unique readings, e.g. Luke
xi. 2, for which Greg. Nyss. is about the only authority (Hoskier).
(Greg. 700.)
</p>

<p>
605. (Act. 233, Paul. 243, Apoc. 106.) Zittaviensis A. 1 [xv], <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>,
ff. 775 (30), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, given to the
Senate of Zittau (Lusatian Saxony) in 1620, contains the canonical
books of the Old Testament down to Esther, with 1 Esdras, 4 Maccabees,
Judith, Tobit, and the whole New Testament. Matthaei collated the
Old Testament portion for Dean Holmes's edition of the Septuagint (Cod.
44), and saw its great critical value. It was examined, as so many others
have been, by Dr. C. R. Gregory. (Greg. 664.)
</p>

<p>
The next two were bought for the Bodleian in 1882: they came from
Constantinople.
</p>

<p>
606. Oxf. Bodl. Gr. Misc. 305 [xi], 9-½ × 7-¼, ff. 149 (27), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (Matt.,
Mark), κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, few <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (later), <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> (Matt.), <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Mark
xvi. 19 (<hi rend='italic'>post</hi> καί) 20. The passages Matt. xvi. 2, 3; John v. 4; vii. 53-viii.
11 are obelized in the margin. (Greg. 707.)
</p>

<p>
607. Oxf. Bodl. Gr. Misc. 306 [xi], 7-¼ × 6, ff. 200 (32, &amp;c.), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, much cropped in binding. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> (1), fol.
1; (2) tops of pages containing τίτλοι; and (3) Quaternion of 8 ff., Matt.
xx. 15-xxiv. 22. (Greg. 708.)
</p>

<p>
608. Brit. Mus. Add. 11,859-60 (palimpsest) is a Typicum or Rituale
[xiv or xv], 10 × 7-¾, ff. 39 + 29 (uncertain), from the Butler collection, having
written under it an earlier cursive text [xiii] containing, in 11,859, Matt.
xii. 33-xiii. 7; xvi. 21-xvii. 15; xx. 1-15; 15-xxi. 5; Mark x. 45-xi.
17: 198 verses; and in 11,860, only twenty-seven verses of the Catholic
Epistles, James 1-16; Jude 4-15. This is Act. 234. (Greg. 1274?)
</p>

<p>
609. Camb. Univ. Libr., Hh. 6. 12 [xv], 8 × 5-¾, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, ff. 182 (20, &amp;c.),
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> This must be Scholz's 1673 (N. T., vol. i. p. cxix),
but it contains the Gospels only, not the Acts, as he supposes. (Greg.
552.)
</p>

<p>
610. Oxf. Bodl. Barocc. 59 [xi], 8-¼  5-½, ff. 6 (21), 1 <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>
(John), κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, containing Luke xxiii. 38-50; xxiv. 46-53;
John i. 30-iii. 5 in a book of other matter [xv], <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> (Greg. 526.)
</p>

<p>
611. Rom. Angel. D. 3. 8, olim Cardinalis Passionei [xi], 9-5/8 × 6-½,
ff. 442 (21), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> St. Luke with Theophylact's commentary,
described with facsimile by Vitali in Bianchini's <q>Evan. Quadr.</q> vol. ii.
pt. 1, pp. 506-40, 563, 560. (Greg. 848.)
</p>

<p>
612. B.-C. I. 11 [xii], 3-½ × 2-½, ff. 112 (25-28), is a very small and
beautiful Ὠδεῖον, containing the Magnificat and Benedictus, besides the
151 Psalms of the Septuagint version, and the Hymns of Moses (Ex. xv.
1-14; Deut. xxxii. 14-43), of Hannah (1 Sam. ii), of Habakkuk (ch.
iii), Isaiah (ch. xxvi), Jonah (ch. ii), with that of the Three Holy
Children. Many such books are extant, of which this is inserted in our
list as a specimen. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> 5<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>pe</hi>, note.
</p>

<p>
John Belsheim, editor of the Codex Aureus, found at Upsal in 1875,
and described to Burgon in 1882, together with Act. 68, three manuscripts
in the University Library there containing the Gospels only.
</p>

<p>
613. Upsala 4, Sparvenfeldt<note place='foot'>Belsheim (Cod. Aureus, Proleg. p. xvii and note 3) gives a short life of that
noble Swede, John Gabriel Sparvenfeldt [1655-1727], who was sent over Europe
by his master, Charles XI, to procure manuscripts for the Royal Library, and
bought the Latin Codex Aureus at Madrid in 1690.</note> 45 [xi], 5-7/8 × 4-½, ff. 208 (25), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, last leaf later, bought at Venice in 1678. (Greg. 899.)
</p>

<p>
614. Upsala 9 [xiii], 9-½ × 7-1/8, ff. 288 (22), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, given by a Greek
priest in 1784 to A. F. Stiertzenbecker, who bequeathed it to the
University Library. (Greg. 900.)
</p>

<p>
615. Upsala 12, Björnsthal 2 [xii], 6-¾ × 4-7/8, ff. 328 (31), <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>,
contains the Gospels, Acts, and Epistles, being Act. 237, Paul. 274.
(Greg. 901.)
</p>

<p>
616. Upsala 13, Björnsthal 3 [xii], 6-¼ × 4-¾, ff. 230 (24), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>
(Greg. 902.)
</p>

<p>
These two last and Act. 236 were bequeathed by Professor J. Björnsthal
to the University Library.
</p>

<p>
617. Oxf. Oriel, MS. lxxxiii [xi or xii], 7-¾ × 5-¾, ff. 236 (22, 23),
2 cols., κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (cut out), τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, written in
gold letters. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> in many places. Brought in 1878 by Capt. J. Hext
from Corfu, and given by him to Mr. Daniel Parsons, who gave it to the
College as a <q>joint gift.</q> (Greg. 618.)
</p>

<p>
618. Camb. Add. 720 [xi], 5-½ × 4-¼, ff. 278 (19, 20), <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ. (fragments of κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> But <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>
of Matt., and perhaps <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> are apparently lost. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt, xxviii. 1-20;
Mark xv. 29-Luke iii. 33. In a later hand is Luke xxiv. 46-53. (Hort
and Bradshaw.) (Greg. 672.)
</p>

<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>

<p>
619. Camb. Add. 1837 [xii or xiii], 8-1/8 × 6-½, ff. 164 (19), injured in
parts by damp. Κεφ., fragment of κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. No
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 1-x. 42; xiii. 3-16; xxvii. 24-37;
Mark xiv. 21-Luke iii. 16; iv. 35-v. 23; vii. 4-15. Ends Luke
xix. 33. (Hort and Bradshaw.) (Greg. 673.)
</p>

<p>
620. Camb. Add. 1879. 11 [xii], 9 × 6-¾, ff. 4 (26), containing Matt. x.
42-xii. 43. <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (not <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>), κεφ., τίτλ. <hi rend='italic'>Lect.</hi> are in a later hand. (Hort
and Bradshaw.) (Greg. 674.) From Tischendorf's collection, as is also:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
621. Camb. Add. 1879. 24 [xiii-xiv], 8-1/8 × 5-¾, ff. 2 (25), containing
Matt. xxvi. 20-39 and ὑπόθεσις and verses before St. Mark. Κεφ., τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (Hort and Bradshaw.) (Greg. 675.)
</p>

<p>
The Rev. H. O. Coxe, late Bodley's Librarian, though quite unable to
purchase any of the literary treasures he was commissioned to inspect in
1857, added considerably by his research to our knowledge of manuscripts
in the East. A list of them was given in groups by Dr. Scrivener in the
third edition of this work: but for various reasons they will be found
separately placed amongst the ensuing MSS., to fill up gaps which have
been since discovered in the supplementary list of cursive manuscripts
that was bound up in the beginning of the last edition.
</p>

<p>
The Evann. 622-735 were reported to Dean Burgon from several
Libraries in reply to his sedulous enquiries. Upon subsequent examination
by Dr. C. R. Gregory on the spot, many of them were seen not to be
Evangelia, but instead of that commentaries of St. Chrysostom, or other
commentaries, or Evangelistaria, or MSS. containing other matter. Thus&mdash;including
the list of the Abbé Martin, who extended Dean Burgon's
numeration up to 776&mdash;the following must be excised: 643-665, 667,
673, 677-679, 681, 682, 685, 686, 688, 689, 695, 700-702, 706, 711,
712, 715-722, 724-728 (including 726 which Dr. Scrivener noticed as
a duplication of 611), 731, 733, 734, 758, 760, 763, 771, 772, 775, 776.
Gregory, Prolegomena, pp. 794, 795. The editor has inserted other
MSS. in their places, being especially those found by the late Rev. H. O.
Coxe in his travels, and enumerated in his Report to Her Majesty's
Government.
</p>

<p>
622. (Act. 242, Paul. 290, Apoc. 110.) Crypta Ferrata, A. a. 1 [xiv],
11-3/8 × 8-¼, ff. 386 (28), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> with <hi rend='italic'>harm.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> (rare), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>,
ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, a beautiful codex of the entire
New Testament. Described by the custodian Rocchi (Codices Cryptenses,
&amp;c., 1882, pp. 1, 2). (Greg. 824.)
</p>

<p>
623. Crypta Ferrata, A. <hi rend='italic'>a.</hi> 2 [xi, Greg. xiii], 9 × 6-5/8, ff. 337 (21), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, a beautiful codex brought from
Corcyra in 1729. Described by Rocchi, pp. 2-4. (Greg. 825.)
</p>

<p>
*624. Crypta Ferrata, A. <hi rend='italic'>a.</hi> 3 [xi, Greg. xii], 8-5/8 × 6-¾, ff. 234 (26), in 2
cols., κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> Collated
by W. H. Simcox (Greg.), agrees with the Ferrar group. A beautiful
codex: written probably at Rhegium. (Greg. 826.)
</p>

<p>
625. Crypta Ferrata, A. <hi rend='italic'>a.</hi> 4 [xi, Greg. xiii], 8-¼ × 6-5/8, ff. 225 (24), κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>; from St. John xix. 21 in a more recent hand.
No <hi rend='italic'>Pericope de adulterâ</hi>. (Greg. 827.)
</p>

<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>

<p>
626. Crypta Ferrata, A. <hi rend='italic'>a.</hi> 5 [xi, Greg. xii], 10-5/8 × 7-7/8, ff. 176 (27),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi> (beautiful), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, ῥήμ.,
στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>; with beautiful Eusebian tables. Described by
Rocchi, pp. 5, 6. (Greg. 828.)
</p>

<p>
627. Crypta Ferrata, A. <hi rend='italic'>a.</hi> 6 [xi, Greg. xii], 8-5/8 × 6-¾, ff. 209 (26),
2 cols., κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> to
St. Mark like Λ. Begins at St. Matt. xiii. 28. Described by Rocchi,
pp. 6, 7. (Greg. 829.)
</p>

<p>
628. Crypta Ferrata, A. <hi rend='italic'>a.</hi> 8 [xiii], 8-5/8 × 4-¾, ff. 118 (26), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>; St. Luke and St. John <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> Described by Rocchi,
p. 8. (Greg. 830.)
</p>

<p>
629. Crypta Ferrata, A. <hi rend='italic'>a.</hi> 17 [xii, Greg. xi], 5-5/8 × 5-1/8, ff. 69 (23), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> A fragment only, beginning at St. Luke xix. 35.
The <hi rend='italic'>pericope de adulterâ</hi> is supplied at the end of the codex&mdash;imperfect
after verse 6. (Greg. 831.)
</p>

<p>
630. Messina, University Library 88 (Evst. 361) [xiv], 10-¼ × 8-½, ff.
260 (22), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi> (exquisite), κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>
All in good preservation. (Greg. 839.)
</p>

<p>
631. Messina, Univ. Libr. 100 [xiii], 10-½ × 7-7/8, ff. 125 (24), τίτλ. St.
Luke i to xxii with a commentary. (Greg. 840.)
</p>

<p>
632. Lond. Butler, formerly Hamilton 244 [xii], 9-5/8 × 6-7/8, ff. ? (22),
<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> (in the same line); superbly
illuminated and adorned with effigies of St. Matthew and of the Virgin
and Child, on gold ground. The Eusebian Canons written in gold
between human figures standing on columns supporting arched arabesque
friezes finely painted in gold and colours. (Greg. 662.)
</p>

<p>
633. Par. Nat. Suppl. 227 [xvi or xvii], 9-¾ × 7-5/8, ff. 212 (22), κεφ., τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>; a Western codex. (Greg. 745.)
</p>

<p>
634. Par. Nat. Suppl. 911 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1043], written by Euphemius
ἀναγνώστης, in black, blue, and red ink, 6-7/8 × 5-3/8, ff. 315 (18), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>
St. Luke, Greek and Arabic. (Greg. 609.)
</p>

<p>
635. Berlin, Royal Gr. 4to, 39 [xii or xi], 9-¾ × 7-5/8, ff. 313, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.
t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. t., κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>harm.</hi> at foot, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ.,
pict. Note that the <hi rend='italic'>pericope de adulterâ</hi> is found in this Evan. as well
as in Evann. 636, 637, 638, 641, and 642. (Greg. 655.)
</p>

<p>
636. Berl. R. Gr. 4to, 47 [xiii or xii], 9-¼ × 5-¾, ff. 220, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> in same line, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> (Greg. 658.)
</p>

<p>
637. Berl. R. Gr. 4to, 55 [xii], 8-¼ × 6-1/8, ff. 292, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (Greg. 659.)
</p>

<p>
638. Berl. R. Gr. 4to, 66 [xii or xi], 8-7/8 × 6-½, ff. 139 (21), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (Greg. 660.)
</p>

<p>
639. Berl. R. Gr. 4to, 67 [xi], 9-7/8 × 7-¾, ff. 234 (23), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (Greg. 661.)
</p>

<p>
640. Berl. R. Gr. 8vo, 3 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1077], 5-7/8 × 4-1/8, ff. 266 (16), κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. (Greg. 653.)
</p>

<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>

<p>
641. Berl. R. Gr. 8vo, 4 [xi or xii], 4-¾ × 3-¾, ff. 178 (25), κεφ., τίτλ.
<hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> in places. Contains from St. Matt. ii. 15 to St. John xix. 32.
(Greg. 654.)
</p>

<p>
642. (Act. 252, Paul 302.) Berl. R. Gr. 8vo, 9 [xi, Greg. xiv], 5-3/8 × 4,
ff. 140 (32), very minute writing, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ.; probably once contained all the New Testament. It
begins now with St. Luke xxiv. 53: <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> after 1 Thess. (Greg. 656.)
</p>

<p>
643. Cairo, Patriarchal Library 2 [xiii], Gospels, 4to. (Greg. 601.)
</p>

<p>
644. Cairo, Patr. Libr. 15 [xi]. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Gosp., 4to. (Greg. 602.)
</p>

<p>
645. Cairo, Patr. Libr. 16 [xi], Gosp., 4to, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, beautifully
written. (Greg. 603.)
</p>

<p>
646. Cairo, Patr. Libr. 17 [xi], Gosp., 4to. (Greg. 604.)
</p>

<p>
647. Cairo, Patr. Libr. 68 [x], Gosp., 4to. (Greg. 605.)
</p>

<p>
648. Cairo, Μετοικία of St. Katherine of Mount Sinai 7 [xvi], Synopsis
of Gospels with Psalter, fol., <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> (Greg. 606.)
</p>

<p>
649. Jerusalem, Holy Sepulchre (monastery of) 2 [x], Gosp., 4to,
beautifully written. (Greg. 607.)
</p>

<p>
650. Jerus. Holy Sepul. 5 [x], Gosp., 4to, beautifully written. (Greg.
608.)
</p>

<p>
651. Jerus. Holy Sepul. 6 (Scholz 450) [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1043], St. Luke (Gr. and
Arab.), 4to, by Euphemius. Beautifully written<note place='foot'>Gregory considers this to be (not a duplicate but) the same as Cod. 634.</note>. (Greg. 450.)
</p>

<p>
652. Jerus. Holy Sepul. 14 [xii], Gosp. with scholia, large 4to. (Greg.
610.)
</p>

<p>
653. Jerus. Holy Sepul. 17 [xi], Gosp. with few scholia, 4to. (Greg.
611.)
</p>

<p>
654. Jerus. Holy Sepul. 31 [xi], Gosp., 4to, very beautiful. (Greg. 612.)
</p>

<p>
655. Jerus. Holy Sepul. 32 [xi], Gosp., 4to. (Greg. 613.)
</p>

<p>
656. Jerus. Holy Sepul. 33 [xii], Gosp., 4to. (Greg. 614.)
</p>

<p>
657. (Act. 325, Paul. 152.) Jerus. Holy Sepul. 40 [xii], N. T., except
Apoc., 4to. A fine copy. (Greg. 615.)
</p>

<p>
658. Jerus. Holy Sepul. 41 [xi], Gosp., 4to, beautiful. (Greg. 616.)
</p>

<p>
659. Jerus. Holy Sepul. 43 [xi], Gosp., fol., scholia (Matt. <hi rend='italic'>unc.</hi> in golden
letters). (Scholz 456?) (Greg. 617.)
</p>

<p>
660. Jerus. Holy Sepul. 44 [xiv], Gosp., fol. (Greg. 618.)
</p>

<p>
661. (Act. 260, Paul. 304.) Jerus. Holy Sepul. 45 [xii], Gosp., Paul.,
Cath., with λέξεις τῶν Πράξεων, 4to. (Greg. 619.)
</p>

<p>
662. Jerus. Holy Sepul. 46 [xi], Gosp., small 4to. (Greg. 620.)
</p>

<p>
663. Jerus. Holy Cross, 3 [xi], Gosp., 4to, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, κεφ. (Greg. 621.)
</p>

<p>
664. St. Saba 27 [xii], Gosp., fol. (Greg. 622.)
</p>

<p>
665. (Act. 328, Paul. 230.) St. Saba 52 [xi], Gosp., Paul., Cath., 4to,
<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> (Greg. 623.)
</p>

<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>

<p>
666. Rom. Vat. Gr. 641 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1287], 10 × 6-5/8, ff. 467 (28), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> The
Gospels, with Theophylact's commentary. (Greg. 854.)
</p>

<p>
667. (Act. 317, Paul. 316.) St. Saba 53 [xi], Gosp., Paul., Cath., 4to.
(Greg. 624.)
</p>

<p>
668. Rom. Vat. Gr. 643 [xii], 10-¼ × 8-¼, ff. 584 (36), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> The Gospels,
with Theophylact's commentary. (Greg. 855.)
</p>

<p>
669. Rom. Vat. Gr. 644 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1280], 13 × 9-½, ff. 349 (44), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, written by order of Michael Palaeologus. Same contents as
the preceding. (Greg. 856.)
</p>

<p>
670. Rom. Vat. Gr. 645 [xii], 11-½ × 9-1/8, ff. 391 (28), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ. St. Luke and St. John, with Theophylact's commentary. (Greg.
857.)
</p>

<p>
671. (Paul. 311.) Rom. Vat. Gr. 647 [xv or xiv], 13-½ × 9-¾, ff. 338 (48),
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> Gospels and Epistles, with commentary of Theophylact. (Greg.
858.)
</p>

<p>
672. Rom. Vat. Gr. 759 [xv or xvi], 8-5/8 × 5-¾, ff. 261, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> St. Luke,
with a commentary. (Greg. 859.)
</p>

<p>
673. (Act. 318, Paul. 317.) St. Saba 54 [xii], Gosp., Paul., Cath., 4to.
(Greg. 625.) (Vat. Gr. 1068 is Evst. 122.&mdash;Greg.)
</p>

<p>
674. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1090 [xvi], 10-¾ × 8-¼, ff. 509 (40), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> The
Gospels, with commentary of Peter of Laodicea. Part i and ii. (Greg. 861.)
</p>

<p>
675. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1191 [xii], 9 × 6-¾, ff. 402 (?), written by one
<q>Arsenius.</q> St. John, with Theophylact's commentary. (Greg. 862.)
</p>

<p>
676. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1221 [xii or xiii], 15-1/8 × 10-5/8, ff. 400 (41), 2 cols.,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> The Gospels, with Theophylact's commentary.
(Greg. 863.)
</p>

<p>
No. 677 is a Catech., 678 is Evst. 551, 679 a commentary. (Greg.)
</p>

<p>
677. St. Saba 56 [x], Gosp., 4to. (Greg. 626.)
</p>

<p>
678. St. Saba 57 [x], Gosp., 4to. (Greg. 627.)
</p>

<p>
679. St. Saba 58 [x], Gosp., 4to. (Greg. 628.)
</p>

<p>
680. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1895 [xv or xiv], 6-½ × 4-3/8, ff. 223 (20), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
with <hi rend='italic'>harm.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi> (Greg. 867.)
</p>

<p>
681. St. Saba 59 [x], Gosp., 4to. (Greg. 629.)
</p>

<p>
682. St. Saba 60 [x], Gosp., 4to. (Greg. 630.)
</p>

<p>
683. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1933 [xvii], 15-5/8 × 10-3/8, ff. 624 (26), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> St.
Luke, with a Catena. (Greg. 868.)
</p>

<p>
684. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1996 [xi or xii], 10-7/8 × 8-5/8, ff. 245 (25), κεφ., τίτλ.,
with a commentary. (Greg. 869.)
</p>

<p>
685. St. Saba 61 <hi rend='italic'>a</hi> [xi], Gosp., 4to. (Greg. 631.)
</p>

<p>
686. St. Saba 61 <hi rend='italic'>b</hi> [xi], Gosp., 4to. (Greg. 632.)
</p>

<p>
687. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2117 [xi], 5-¼ × 4-3/8, ff. 164 (29), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> (later); a beautiful Evangelium. (Greg. 871.)
</p>

<p>
688. St. Saba 61 c [xi], Gosp., 4to. (Greg. 633.)
</p>

<p>
689. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2165 [xi], 13-3/8 × 9-7/8, ff. 289 (23), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>,
<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>
<hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, ῥήμ., στίχ., olim Columnensis
4. This was Evst. 391. (Greg. 873.)
</p>

<p>
690. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2160 [xi or xii], 8-¼ × 6-¼, ff. 180 (26), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
<q>Venit e familia principe Romanâ De Alteriis, cujus stemma argenteum
in tegmine habet.</q> (Greg. 872.)
</p>

<p>
691. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2187 [xii or xiii], 11-¼ × 7-¾, ff. 383 (27), olim
Columnensis 26. St. John, with Commentary of Theophylact. (Greg.
874.)
</p>

<p>
692. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2247 [?], 7-7/8 × 5-7/8, ff. 228 (23), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> (John),
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>; a fine codex. Column. 86.
(Greg. 875.)
</p>

<p>
693. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2275 [xvi], 13-5/8 × 9-¼, ff. 2 + 17 (40), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, fragments
of SS. Matt. and John with comm. (Greg. 876.)
</p>

<p>
694. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2290 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1197], 10-½ × 8-¼, ff. 218 (25), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi> A splendid codex.
It has been numbered 2161. (Greg. 877.)
</p>

<p>
695. St. Saba 61 <hi rend='italic'>d</hi> [xi], Gosp., 4to. (Greg. 634.)
</p>

<p>
696. Rom. Vat. Reg. Gr. 3 [xiii, Greg. xi], 13-7/8 × 10-½, ff. 256 (30),
St. Luke and St. John, with commentary of Chrys.; begins Luke iii. 1.
(Greg. 884.)
</p>

<p>
697. Rom. Vat. Reg. Gr. 5 [xv], 11-5/8 × 8-¾, ff. 439 (29), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> St.
Matthew, with a commentary. (Greg. 885.)
</p>

<p>
698. (Act. 268, Paul. 324, Apoc. 117.) Rom. Vat. Reg. Gr. 6 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1454], 13-½ × 9-¾, ff. 336 (59), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> The Gospels, with commentary
of Nicetas of Naupactus; Acts and St. Paul, with commentary of
Theophylact; Apoc., with the commentary of an anonymous writer.
(Greg. 886.)
</p>

<p>
699. Rom. Vat. Reg. Gr. 9 [xi], 11-¾ × 9-7/8, ff. 197 (38). St. John,
with a commentary. (Greg. 887.)
</p>

<p>
700. St. Saba 61 <hi rend='italic'>e</hi> [xi], Gosp., 4to. (Greg. 635.)
</p>

<p>
701. St. Saba 62 <hi rend='italic'>a</hi> [xii], Gosp., 4to. (Greg. 636.)
</p>

<p>
702. St. Saba 62 <hi rend='italic'>b</hi> [xii], Gosp., 4to. (Greg. 637.)
</p>

<p>
703. Rom. Vat. Ottob. 37 [xii], 13-½ × 18-½, ff. 248 (46), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, with the commentary of Theophylact.
Pars i et ii. Olim Altemprianus. (Greg. 878.)
</p>

<p>
704. Rom. Vat. Ottob. 100 [xvi], ff. 105, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, part of St. Luke, with
commentary. (Greg. 879.)
</p>

<p>
705. Rom. Vat. Ottob. 208 [xv], 8-3/8 × 5-3/8, ff. 255 (17), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> A fine Evangelium, with pictures. (Greg. 880.)
</p>

<p>
706. St. Saba 62 <hi rend='italic'>c</hi> [xii], Gosp., 4to. (Greg. 638.)
</p>

<p>
707, 708, 709. Rom. Vat. Ottob. 453, 454, 456 [xiii, Greg. xv], 13-¾ × 9-½, ff.
171 + 171 + 181 (31), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> The Gospels, with Theophylact's
commentary. Dr. Gregory, having examined these three, pronounces
them parts of the same MS. (Greg. 881.)
</p>

<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>

<p>
710. St. Saba 62 <hi rend='italic'>d</hi> [xii], Gosp., 4to. (Greg. 639.) Dr. Gregory identifies
710 with Evan. 146.
</p>

<p>
711. St. Saba 62 <hi rend='italic'>e</hi> [xii], Gosp., 4to. (Greg. 640.)
</p>

<p>
712. St. Saba, Tower Library 45 [xi], Gosp., 4to. (Greg. 641.)
</p>

<p>
713. Rom. Vat. Pal. 32 [xi or x], 14-¼ × 10-½, ff. 181, 2 cols. St. John,
with commentary of Chrys. (Greg. 882.)
</p>

<p>
714. Rom. Vat. Pal. 208 [xv], 8-1/8 × 5-1/8, ff. 247 (24), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> St. John,
with Theophylact's commentary. (Greg. 883.)
</p>

<p>
715. St. Saba, Tower Library 46 [xii], Gosp., 4to. (Greg. 642.)
</p>

<p>
716. St. Saba, Tower Library 47 [xi], Gosp., 4to. (Greg. 643.)
</p>

<p>
717. Patmos, St. John 2 [xii], Gosp., scholia, 4to. (Greg. 467.)
</p>

<p>
718. Patmos, St. John 6 [x], Gosp., 4to, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> (Greg. 468.)
</p>

<p>
719<note place='foot'>For the other Evann. at Patmos, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> No. 1160, &amp;c.</note>. Patmos, St. John 21 [xii], Gosp., fol. (Greg. 469.)
</p>

<p>
720. Cyprus, Larnaca [xii], Gosp., 4to, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> (Greg. 644.) Five more
were noted by Mr. Coxe, but he was unable through illness to see them.
They have been examined since then by Dr. Gregory.
</p>

<p>
721. Constantinople ἁγίου τάφου 436 [xiii], 7-7/8 × 5-7/8, ff. ? (22), written
by several hands, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> (See Greg. 646.)
</p>

<p>
722. Constant, ἁγ. τάφ. 520 [xiii], 10 × 7-3/8, ff. ? (24), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg.
647.)
</p>

<p>
723. Rom. Angelic. B. i. 5 [xii, Greg. xiv], 11-½ × 8-¾, ff. ? (33), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> Formerly belonged to Card. Passionei. Matt. and
Mark with catena. (Greg. 847.)
</p>

<p>
724. Constant, ἁγ. τάφ. 574 [xiv], 9-½ × 7, ff. ? (23), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> end of Mark, beg. and end of Luke, many places in John. (Greg.
648.)
</p>

<p>
725. Constant. τοῦ ἑλληνικοῦ φιλολογικοῦ συλλόγου 1 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1303?],
11-½ × 8-5/8, ff. 294 (44), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 2 cols. Gospels with commentary much in
a later hand. Written by a certain George. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 649.)
</p>

<p>
726. Constant, τ. ἑλλ. φιλ. συλλόγ. 5 [xiii], 5-¼ × 7, ff. ? (24), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> (See Greg. 650.)
</p>

<p>
727, 728, 731, 733. Chalké, Trinity Monastery, ten miles from Constantinople,
seen by Dr. Millingen, and reported by Coxe, four Evang.,
with silver clasps, numbered by him 1, 2, 3, 4. These four MSS.
(727, 728, 731, and 733) seem to be the same as those which Dr. Gregory
has recorded as <q>Chalcis monasterii Trinitatis 11 et 12,</q> and <q>Chalcis
scholae 8</q> and 27 (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1370, fol., κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>), the
latter of which with two more (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> below, 734, 735) he saw. Dr. Millingen
mentions eight; but Dr. Gregory records only six, which must
be taken to be the number. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Prolegomena 1144-49, p. 608.
</p>

<p>
729. Rom. Barberini iv. 86 (olim 228) [x, Greg. xii], 11-1/8 × 8-½, ff. 381
(35 ?), 2 cols. St. John, with Cyril's commentary. (Greg. 850.)
</p>

<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>

<p>
730. Rom. Barb. iv. 77 (ol. 210) [xvii], 10-¾ × 8, ff. 152 (21), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
St. John, with Books v and vi of Cyril's commentary. (Greg. 849.)
</p>

<p>
732. Rom. Borgian. (Propag.) L. vi. 10 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1300], 9-1/8 × 6-½, ff. 165,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men</hi>. The Gospels, with Menologium. <q>Birchius
eo usus est:</q> but he makes no mention of it. (Greg. 852.)
</p>

<p>
734. Chalké, <q>Chalcis scholae</q> 95 [xiii], 4to, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
735. Chalké (Act. 288, Paul. 336), <q>Chalcis scholae</q> 133 [xiii], 4to.
</p>

<p>
736. Bought of Muller, the London bookseller, and collated by H. B.
Swete, D.D., Regius Professor of Divinity, Cambridge [xi or xii, Greg.
xiv], 7-½ × 6, ff. 254, in modern binding. After signature 28 seven
leaves [xiv?] containing John xviii. 39, ὑμῖν ἵνα to the end are supplied.
<hi rend='italic'>Syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> later), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> like Λ,
στίχ. In the margin are textual corrections, some <foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign>. The
readings are sometimes curious. (Greg. 718.)
</p>

<p>
737. Ox. Bodl. Misc. Gr. 314, found at Rhodes in 1882, and procured
through Mr. Edmund Calvert [xi], 7-½ × 6, ff. 118 (21), 2 cols., κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., ῥήμ. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. v. 40-xxi. 1;
Luke xv. 4-xxii. 49; xxiv. 34-52; John iv. 14-ix. 11; xiii. 3-xv.
10; xvi. 21-xxi. 25 (some fresh leaves having been lately purchased).
It was apparently written by an Armenian scribe (F. Madan). A later
hand [xiii] supplies Luke iii. 25-iv. 11; vi. 25-42 in palimpsest, over
writing not much earlier than itself. (Greg. 709.)
</p>

<p>
The following MSS. (738-774) are from the late Abbé Martin's list
of MSS. at Paris (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <q>Description Technique</q>), and are numbered by him
as they are given here:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
738. (Act. 262, Apoc. 123.) Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 159 [xiii, Greg. xiv],
15-¾ × 11-3/8, ff. 406 (36), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (Greg. 743.)
</p>

<p>
739. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 919 [xiii, Greg. xv], 5-7/8 × 4-7/8, ff. 19 (47),
<hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> (remarkable), κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> Contains
Matt, ii. 13-ix. 17. (Greg. 751.)
</p>

<p>
740. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 611 [x, Greg. xi], 10-½ × 7-¾, ff. 396 (47),
<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol</hi>. Section of adultery
omitted, a leaf probably lost. (Greg. 746.)
</p>

<p>
741. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 612 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1164], 9-3/8 × 7-½, ff. 376 (53),
<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> Commentary.
(Greg. 747.)
</p>

<p>
742. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 914 [xi-xii], 11-¾ × 8-¾, ff. 319 (20), κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> (Greg. 750.)
</p>

<p>
743. Par. Nat. Gr. 97 [xiii], 8-5/8 × 6-1/8, ff. 152 (28), κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Mut</hi>. John xx. 15-end. Has a double termination to St. Mark written
by George. (Greg. 579.)
</p>

<p>
744. Par. Nat. Gr. 119 [xi, Greg. xii or xiii], 6 × 4-1/8, ff. 382 (25),
Greg. 388 (16), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>
A beautiful MS. (Greg. 580.)
</p>

<p>
745. Par. Nat. Gr. 179 [xvi, Greg. xiv], 13-½ × 9-7/8, ff. 246 (50), 2 cols.,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ. Beautiful; Gospels with Theoph. (Greg. 727.)
</p>

<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>

<p>
746. Par. Nat. Gr. 181 [xiii, Greg. xiv], 11-5/8 × 8-½, ff. 230 (68), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> Gospels with Theoph.
(Greg. 728.)
</p>

<p>
747. Par. Nat. Gr. 182 [xiii], 11-5/8 × 8-½, ff. 341 (47), 2 cols., κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
τίτλ. Gospels with Theoph. (Greg. 729.)
</p>

<p>
748. Par. Nat. Gr. 183 [xiv], 9-7/8 × 6-½, ff. 331 (32), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
τίτλ. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> John xvi. 4-end. Gospels with Theoph. (Greg. 730.)
</p>

<p>
749. Par. Nat. Gr. 184 [xiv], 9-½ × 5-¾, ff. 426 (40), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> Gospels with Theoph. (Greg. 731.)
</p>

<p>
750. Par. Nat. Gr. 185 [xiii or xiv], ff. 271 (38), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ. Gospels with Theoph. (Greg. 732.)
</p>

<p>
751. Par. Nat. Gr. 190 [xii], 11-5/8 × 8-¾, ff. 347 (42), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
(Matt.), κεφ., τίτλ. (Greg. 733.)
</p>

<p>
752. Par. Nat. Gr. 192 [xiv or xv], 11-/¾ × 8-5/8, ff. 297 (39), (269-297
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>). SS. John, Matt., Luke with Theoph. (Greg. 734.)
</p>

<p>
753. Par. Nat. Gr. 196 [xiii, Greg. xv], 9-¼ × 6-1/8, ff. 164 (50), latter
part a palimpsest. SS. Matt. and Luke with Theoph. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt.
i. 1-vii. 16 (xii. 33, and other places, Greg.) (Greg. 735.)
</p>

<p>
754. Par. Nat. Gr. 198 [xi or xii], 10-7/8 × 7-¾, ff. 235 (34), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ. Gospels with Theoph. (Greg. 736.)
</p>

<p>
755. Par. Nat. Gr. 204 [xiii], 10-½ × 8-1/8, ff. 176 (30), Matt. with
Theoph. (Greg. 737.)
</p>

<p>
756. Par. Nat. Gr. 205 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1327], 11-½ × 8-¼, ff. 80 (38), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ. Matt. with Theoph. (Greg. 738.)
</p>

<p>
757. Par. Nat. Gr. 207 [xv], 13-½ × 8-7/8, ff. 48 (39). Luke with Theoph.
(Greg. 739.)
</p>

<p>
758. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 903 [xii], ?, ff. 278, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> in many places. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 748, who also notes that
Nat. Gr. 214 is only a homily.)
</p>

<p>
759. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 219 [xii or xiii], 9-¼ × 8-¼, ff. 367 (27), τίτλ.
(Matt.), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (Luke). Gospels with Theoph. (Greg. 744.)
</p>

<p>
760. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 1035, frag. [viii ?] ff. 12; [xi or xii], 8 × 6,
ff. 182 (35), <hi rend='italic'>membr.</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> later). Matt. xxiii. 11-21.
(<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 753.)
</p>

<p>
761. Par. Nat. Gr. 234 [xii or xiii, Greg. xiv or xv], 9-¾ × 7, ff. 441
(36), (Greg. 444 (33, &amp;c.)), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> Gospels with
Theoph. (Greg. 740.)
</p>

<p>
762. Par. Nat. Gr. 235 [xiv], 9-3/8 × 6-½, ff. 362 (26-52), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>
Gospels with Theoph. (Greg. 741.)
</p>

<p>
763. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 1076 [xi], small fol., ff. 465, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi> Brought
from Janina. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 754.)
</p>

<p>
764. Par. Nat. Gr. 1775 [xv-xvi], 8-½ × 6, ff. 160, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> St. John
with Theoph. (Greg. 742.)
</p>

<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>

<p>
765. Par. Nat. Coislin. Gr. 128 [Mart. xi, xii, Greg. xiii], 12-5/8 × 9-5/8,
ff. 344 (40), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ. Gospels with Theoph. (Greg. 1261.)
</p>

<p>
766. Par. Nat. Coisl. Gr. 129 [xiii, xiv], 12-7/8 × 9-½, ff. 317 (43), 2 cols.
Gospels with Theoph. (Greg. 1262.)
</p>

<p>
767. Par. Nat. Coisl. Gr. 198 [xiii, xiv], 9-¾ × 6-½, ff. 434 (26), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi> Gospels with Theoph. (Greg. 1263.)
</p>

<p>
768. Par. Nat. Coisl. Gr. 203 [xii, xiii], 9-¾ × 7-¾, ff. 435 (33), keph. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, τίτλ. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> in places. Gospels with commentary. (Greg. 1265.)
</p>

<p>
769. Par. Nat. Coisl. Gr. 206 [x or xi], 11 × 8-½, ff. 432 (25), <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (2 vols., Greg.). (Greg. 1266.)
</p>

<p>
770. (Paul. 478.) Par. Nat. Coisl. Gr. 207 [xiv], 10-7/8 × 7-7/8, ff. 295
(36), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> St. John and Rom., 2 Cor., Gal. i. 1-ii. 15 with Theoph.
(Greg. 1267.)
</p>

<p>
771. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 1080 [xiv], 4to, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, ff. 332. Brought
from Janina. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 755.)
</p>

<p>
772. Par. Nat. Suppl. 1083 [xi], 4to, ff. 179. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> at end. Written
by Michaelis. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 756.)
</p>

<p>
773. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 904 [xii or xiii], 13 × 9-½, ff. 199 (40), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ. Fragment of Gosp. with Theoph. (Greg. 749.)
</p>

<p>
774. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 927 [xii or xiii], 6-1/8 × 4-½, ff. 199 (26), (<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>), κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (later). (Greg. 572.)
</p>

</div>

<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IX. Cursive Manuscripts Of The Gospels. Part III.</head>

<p>
We have now come to Dr. Gregory's list, where Dr. Scrivener's
and the Abbé Martin's have ceased, and shall follow it,
except in the case of MSS. which have been already recorded,
and which therefore must be replaced by other MSS. Whenever
no independent information is at hand, the MS. will be
simply noted, and the reader is referred to Dr. Gregory's <q>Prolegomena</q>
under the same number. Information from other
sources than Dr. Gregory's book will in each case, where the
Editor has discovered it, be duly given. Whenever no reference
is made to Dr. Gregory's list, the numbers in both lists are the
same.
</p>

<p>
The particulars added to MSS. at Athens are taken from the
Catalogue by K. Alcibiades I. Sakkelion, obligingly lent me
with others by Mr. J. Rendel Harris; but the press-marks of the
MSS. have apparently been changed since Dr. Gregory examined
them, and I have not succeeded in obtaining information upon
this point. I have therefore identified the MSS. as best I could,
and have inserted queries when there seemed to be doubt. The
number in brackets is the present press-mark. The two measurements
often differ; I have followed that of Sakkelion.
</p>

<p>
775. Athens, Nat. Sakkelion 3 (58) [xiii], 4-¾ × 4, ff. 223. Belonged to
John Cantacuzenus.
</p>

<p>
776. Ath. Nat. Sakkel. 5 (76) [xii], 8-¼ × 5-5/8, ff. 387, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>
</p>

<p>
777. Ath. Nat. Sakkel. 6 (93) [xiv], 8-5/8 × 5-¾, ff. 185, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
778. Ath. Nat. Sakkel. 7 (80) [xiv], 9-½ × 6-¾, ff. 195, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
779. Ath. Nat. 1 (127) [xiv], 7-7/8 × 5-7/8, ff. 171, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
780. Ath. Nat. 5 (121) [xi], 8-¼ × 6-3/8, ff. 241, scholia in red.
</p>

<p>
781. Ath. Nat. 14 (110 ?) [xv], 8-5/8 × 5-7/8, ff. 197.
</p>

<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>

<p>
782. Ath. Nat. 16 (81?) [xiv], 9 × 7-1/8, ff. 277.
</p>

<p>
783. Ath. Nat. 17 (71 ?) [xiv], 11 × 8-5/8, ff. 211, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
784. Ath. Nat. 20 (87 ??) [xiv], 8-5/8 × 5-7/8, ff. 161, <hi rend='italic'>cotton</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi>
beg., κεφ.
</p>

<p>
785. Ath. Nat. 21 (118) [xi], 7-½ × 5-7/8, ff. 230, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
786. Ath. Nat. 22 (125 ?) [xv], 7-1/8 × 4-¾, ff. 280.
</p>

<p>
787. Ath. Nat. 23 (108 ?) [xiv], ff. 305.
</p>

<p>
788. Ath. Nat. 26 (74 ?) [x], 8-5/8 × 6-¾, ff. 219, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
789. Ath. Nat. 27 (134 ?) [xii-xiv], 5-1/8 × 4, ff. 250 (1-23 and 245-50,
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>).
</p>

<p>
790. Ath. Nat. 39 (95 ??), 11 × 7-7/8, ff. 163, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> beg. (167 ff.) and end
(many). SS. John and Luke, with commentary of Titus of Bostra.
</p>

<p>
791. Ath. Nat. 60 (77) [xiv], 8-5/8 × 5-7/8, ff. 229, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
792. (Apoc. 111.) Ath. Nat. 67 <hi rend='smallcaps'>m</hi> (107) [xv], 3-½ × 2-¾, ff. 145. Beautifully
written in very small letters.
</p>

<p>
793. Ath. Nat. 71 (75) [xiv], 6-¾ × 5-7/8, ff. 255, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
794. (Act. 269, Paul. 401.) Ath. Nat. 118 (122), 8-¼ × 5-7/8, ff. 269.
</p>

<p>
795. Ath. Nat. 150 (109 ??) [xv], 5-7/8 × 4, ff. 324. (In Greg. <q>2</q> for
<q>?</q>: else how could <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, &amp;c, occur in two leaves?)
</p>

<p>
796. (Act. 321, Paul. 276.) Ath. Nat. 767 (160) [xi], 6-3/8 × 4-3/8, ff. 323,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
797. Ath. Nat. (111 ?) [xv], 7-½ × 5-½, ff. 223.
</p>

<p>
798. Ath. Nat. (137 ?) [xiv], 6-¾ × 4-3/8, ff. 113, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> ff. 2 at beg., and
from Mark viii. 3 to end of Gospels, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
799. Ath. Nat. 117 [xi], 7-7/8 × 5-½, ff. 366.
</p>

<p>
800. Ath. Nat. 150 (65 ?) [xii], 10-¾ × 7-½.
</p>

<p>
801. (Act. 326, Paul. 313.) Ath. Nat. (130) [xv], 8-¼ × 5-½, ff. 324.
</p>

<p>
802. Ath. Nat. (99) [xiv], 9-7/8 × 7-½, ff. 24. St. Luke i. 1-vi. 13.
</p>

<p>
803. Ath. Nat. (88) [xvi], 8-5/8 × 5-7/8, ff. 176. Gospels except St. John.
</p>

<p>
804. Ath. τῆς Βουλῆς.
</p>

<p>
805. Ath. τῆς Βουλῆς.
</p>

<p>
806. Ath. τῆς Βουλῆς.
</p>

<p>
807. Ath. τῆς Βουλῆς.
</p>

<p>
808. (Act. 265, Paul. 463, Apoc. 150.) Ath. Dom. Mamoukae.
</p>

<p>
809. Ath. Dom. Mamoukae.
</p>

<p>
810. Ath. Dom. Οἰκόνομου 6.
</p>

<p>
811. Ath. Soc. Archaeolog. Christ.
</p>

<p>
812. Corcyra, Abp. Eustathius.
</p>

<p>
813. Corcyra, Abp. Eustathius.
</p>

<p>
814. Corcyra, Abp. Eustathius.
</p>

<p>
815. Corcyra, Comes de Gonemus.
</p>

<p>
816. Corcyra.
</p>

<p>
817. Basle, A. N. iii. 15.
</p>

<p>
818. Escurial Ψ. iii. 13.
</p>

<p>
819. Escurial Ψ. iii. 14.
</p>

<p>
820. Escurial Ω. i. 16.
</p>

<p>
821. Madrid, Reg. O. 10.
</p>

<p>
822. Madrid, Reg. O. 62.
</p>

<p>
823. (Act. 266, Paul. 404.) Berlin Reg. 8vo. 13.
</p>

<p>
824. Vienna, Imp. Gr. Theol. 19.   (Greg. 719.)
</p>

<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>

<p>
825. Vienna, Imp. Gr. Theol. 79, 80. (Greg. 720.)
</p>

<p>
826. Vienna, Imp. Gr. Theol. 90. (Greg. 721.)
</p>

<p>
827. Vienna, Imp. Gr. Theol. 95. (Greg. 722.)
</p>

<p>
828. Vienna, Imp. Gr. Theol. 122. (Greg. 723.)
</p>

<p>
829. Vienna, Imp. Priv. Bibl. 7972. (Greg. 724.)
</p>

<p>
830. Milan, Ambr. A. 178 supr. (Greg. 589.)
</p>

<p>
831. Parma, Reg. 15. (Greg. 590.)
</p>

<p>
832. (Act. 143.) Florence, Laurentian Libr. vi. 5.
</p>

<p>
833. Florence, Laurent, vi. 26.
</p>

<p>
834. Flor. Laur. xi. 6.
</p>

<p>
835. Flor. Laur. xi. 8.
</p>

<p>
836. Flor. Laur. xi. 18.
</p>

<p>
837. Milan, Ambr. E. S. iv. 14. Ff. 34-66.
</p>

<p>
838. Formerly Milan, <q>Hoeplii.</q>
</p>

<p>
839. Messina, Univ. 88.
</p>

<p>
840. Messina, Univ. 100.
</p>

<p>
841. Modena, iii. F. 13.
</p>

<p>
842. Modena, G. 9.
</p>

<p>
843. Naples, Nat. Libr. II. AA. 37.
</p>

<p>
844. Padua, Univ. 695.
</p>

<p>
845. Pistoia, Fabron. Libr. 307.
</p>

<p>
846. Athens, Nat. Theol. (150, 12) [xv], 11-¾ × 8-5/8 (Act. 209, Paul.
399, Apoc. 146), ff. 414, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (Greg. 757.)
</p>

<p>
847. Athens, Nat. Theol. (151, 13) [xiv], 5-½ × 4, ff. 301, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, &amp;c. (Greg. 758.)
</p>

<p>
848. Ath. Nat. Theol. (152, 14) [xiii], 8-5/8 × 5-7/8, ff. 295, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> Theophyl., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., &amp;c., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, ἀναγν.
(Greg. 759.)
</p>

<p>
849. Ath. Nat. Theol. (153, 15) [xiv], 8-¼ × 6-3/8, ff. 283, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi> (Greg.
760.)
</p>

<p>
850. Ath. Nat. Theol. (154, 16) [xiv], 8-¼ × 6, ff. 281, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ. (Greg. 761.)
</p>

<p>
851. Rom. Propag. L. vi. 9.
</p>

<p>
852. Ath. Nat. Theol. (155, 17) [xiv], 9 × 6-3/8, ff. 332, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> (Greg. 762.)
</p>

<p>
853. Rom. Casanatensis G. ii. 9.
</p>

<p>
854. Ath. Nat. Theol. (156, 18) [xv], 9-½ × 6-3/8, ff. 324 (4 <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
(Greg. 763.)
</p>

<p>
855. Ath. Nat. Theol. (157, 19) [xii], 11-3/8 × 7-½, ff. 316, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at beg.
and end. (Greg. 764.)
</p>

<p>
856. Ath. Nat. Theol. (158, 20) [xiv], 7-½ × 5-1/8, ff. 229. (Greg. 765.)
</p>

<p>
857. Ath. Nat. Theol. (159, 21) [xiv], 7-7/8 × 4-¾, ff. 316 (12 <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>).
(Greg. 766.)
</p>

<p>
858. (Act. 267, Paul. 400.) Ath. Nat. Theol. (160, 22) [xi], ff. 323,
<hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (Greg. 767.)
</p>

<p>
859. Ath. Nat. Theol. (161, 23) [xiv], 7-1/8 × 5-½, ff. 222 (14 <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>).
(Greg. 768.)
</p>

<p>
860. Rom. Vat. Gr. 774.
</p>

<p>
861. Ath. Nat. Theol. (162, 24) [xv], 9 × 6-3/8, ff. 253. (Greg. 769.)
</p>

<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>

<p>
862. Ath. Nat. Theol. (203, 66) [xi], 10-5/8 × 7-7/8, ff. 270, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> beg.
and end. (Greg. 770.)
</p>

<p>
863. Ath. Nat. Theol. (204, 67) [x], 12-½ × 9, ff. 153, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> middle and
end, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi> (Greg. 771.)
</p>

<p>
864. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1253.
</p>

<p>
865. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1472.
</p>

<p>
866. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1882, ff. 10-16 (Apoc. 115).
</p>

<p>
867. Ath. Nat. Theol. (489, 216) [xv], 10-¼ × 7-½, ff. 387 (21 <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>,
comm. of Theophylact). (Greg. 772.)
</p>

<p>
868. Ath. Nat. Sakkelion 1 (56) [x], 13-3/8 × 9-7/8, ff. 285, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, mut.,
Carp., <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi> (Greg. 773.)
</p>

<p>
869. Ath. Nat. Sakkel. 2 (57) [xi-xii], 10-¼ × 7-7/8, ff. (368-3 plain)
365, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi> (Greg. 774.)
</p>

<p>
870. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2115, ff. 166-170.
</p>

<p>
871. Montpelier, Schol. Med. H. 446. (Greg. 577.)
</p>

<p>
872. Arras, 970. (Greg. 578.)
</p>

<p>
873. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2165.
</p>

<p>
874. Dessau. (Greg. 651.)
</p>

<p>
875. Munich, Reg. 594. (Greg. 652.)
</p>

<p>
876. Berlin, Reg. Gr. 4to, 12. (Greg. 657.)
</p>

<p>
877. Strasburg, Ed. Reuss. (Greg. 663.)
</p>

<p>
878. Petersburg, Imp. Muralt. 56 (vii). (Greg. 567.)
</p>

<p>
879. Petersburg, Imp. Muralt. 67. (Greg. 568.)
</p>

<p>
880. Petersburg, Imp. Muralt. 105. (Greg. 574.)
</p>

<p>
881. Brussels, Reg. 11,358. (Greg. 725.)
</p>

<p>
882. Brussels, Reg. 11,375. (Greg. 726.)
</p>

<p>
883. Rom. Corsin. 41 G. 16. (Greg. 591.)
</p>

<p>
884. London, Mr. White 2. (Greg. 702.)
</p>

<p>
885. Formerly London, Quaritch [1251]. (Greg. 703.)
</p>

<p>
886. Manchester, Rylands Library, formerly Quaritch [xiii], 4-3/8 × 3-¼,
ff. 324 (18), 2 cols., with Latin version to St. Matthew. (Greg. 704.)
</p>

<p>
887. Hackney, Lord Amherst, formerly Quaritch [xiii], 9-½ × 6-¾, ff.
253 (18), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> (Greg. 705.)
</p>

<p>
888. Venice, St. Mark 26.
</p>

<p>
889. Venice, St. Mark 30.
</p>

<p>
890. Venice, St. Mark 31.
</p>

<p>
891. Venice, St. Mark 32. (Paul. 325.)
</p>

<p>
892. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 33,277 [x], 6 × 4-½, ff. 353 (20), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
at end and later, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>
Beautifully written in minute characters, but damaged and faded.
Bought from H. L. Dupuis in 1887. (Collated by J. R. Harris, Journal
of Biblical Literature, ix. 1890.)
</p>

<p>
893. Venice, St. Mark i. 61.
</p>

<p>
894. Venice, St. Mark ii. 144.
</p>

<p>
895. Cheltenham, 6899. (Greg. 665.)
</p>

<p>
896. Edinburgh, Mackellar.
</p>

<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>

<p>
897.  Edinburgh, Univ. David Laing 6.
</p>

<p>
898.  Edinburgh, Univ. Laing, 667.
</p>

<p>
899.  Massachusetts, Harvard. (Greg. 666.)
</p>

<p>
900.  New Caesarea (U.S.A.), Madison, Drew 3. (Greg. 667.)
</p>

<p>
901.  Tennessee (U.S.A.), Sewanee, Benton 2. (Greg. 670.)
</p>

<p>
902.  Tennessee, Sewanee, Benton 3. (Greg. 669.)
</p>

<p>
903.  Cairo, Patriarch. Alex. 421.
</p>

<p>
904.  Cairo, Patriarch. Alex. 952.
</p>

<p>
905.  Athos, St. Andrew A´.
</p>

<p>
906.  Athos, St. Andrew E´.
</p>

<p>
907.  Athos, St. Andrew H´.
</p>

<p>
908.  Athos, St. Andrew Θ´.
</p>

<p>
909.  Athos, Vatopedi 206.
</p>

<p>
910.  Athos, Vatopedi 207.
</p>

<p>
911.  Athos, Vatopedi 211.
</p>

<p>
912.  Athos, Vatopedi 212.
</p>

<p>
913.  Athos, Vatopedi 213.
</p>

<p>
914.  Athos, Vatopedi 214.
</p>

<p>
915.  Athos, Vatopedi 215.
</p>

<p>
916.  Athos, Vatopedi 216.
</p>

<p>
917.  Athos, Vatopedi 217.
</p>

<p>
918.  Athos, Vatopedi 218.
</p>

<p>
919.  Athos, Vatopedi 219 [June, 1112, Greg. 1116], 16mo.  Written
by one Constantine. (Greg. Constantius.)
</p>

<p>
920.  Athos, Vatopedi 220.
</p>

<p>
921.  Athos, Vatopedi 414.
</p>

<p>
922.  Athos, Gregory 3. (Act. 270, Paul. 407, Apoc. 151.)
</p>

<p>
923.  Athos, Gregory τοῦ ἡγουμέρον.
</p>

<p>
924.  Athos, Dionysius 4.
</p>

<p>
925.  Athos, Dionysius 5.
</p>

<p>
926.  Athos, Dionysius 7.
</p>

<p>
927.  Athos, Dionysius 8.
</p>

<p>
928.  Athos, Dionysius 9.
</p>

<p>
929.  Athos, Dionysius 12.
</p>

<p>
930.  Athos, Dionysius 22.
</p>

<p>
931.  Athos, Dionysius 23.
</p>

<p>
932.  Athos, Dionysius 24.
</p>

<p>
933.  Athos, Dionysius 25.
</p>

<p>
934.  Athos, Dionysius 26.
</p>

<p>
935.  Athos, Dionysius 27.
</p>

<p>
936.  Athos, Dionysius 28.
</p>

<p>
937.  Athos, Dionysius 29.
</p>

<p>
938.  Athos, Dionysius 30.
</p>

<p>
939.  Athos, Dionysius 31.
</p>

<p>
940.  Athos, Dionysius 32.
</p>

<p>
941.  Athos, Dionysius 33.
</p>

<p>
942.  Athos, Dionysius 34.
</p>

<p>
943.  Athos, Dionysius 35.
</p>

<p>
944.  Athos, Dionysius 36.
</p>

<p>
945.  Athos, Dionysius 37.
</p>

<p>
946.  Athos, Dionysius 38.
</p>

<p>
947.  Athos, Dionysius 39.
</p>

<p>
948.  Athos, Dionysius 40.
</p>

<p>
949.  Athos, Dionysius 64.
</p>

<p>
950.  Athos, Dionysius 67.
</p>

<p>
951.  Athos, Dionysius 80.
</p>

<p>
952.  Athos, Dionysius 310.
</p>

<p>
953.  Athos, Dionysius 311.
</p>

<p>
954.  Athos, Dionysius 312.
</p>

<p>
955.  Athos, Dionysius 313.
</p>

<p>
956.  Athos, Dionysius 314.
</p>

<p>
957.  Athos, Dionysius 315.
</p>

<p>
958.  Athos, Dionysius 316.
</p>

<p>
959.  Athos, Dionysius 317.
</p>

<p>
960.  Athos, Dionysius 318.
</p>

<p>
961.  Athos, Dionysius 319.
</p>

<p>
962.  Athos, Dionysius 320.
</p>

<p>
963.  Athos, Dionysius 321.
</p>

<p>
964.  Athos, Docheiariou 7.
</p>

<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>

<p>965. Athos, Docheiariou 21.</p>
<p>966. Athos, Docheiariou 22.</p>
<p>967. Athos, Docheiariou 30.</p>
<p>968. Athos, Docheiariou 35.</p>
<p>969. Athos, Docheiariou 39.</p>
<p>970. Athos, Docheiariou 42.</p>
<p>971. Athos, Docheiariou 46.</p>
<p>972. Athos, Docheiariou 49.</p>
<p>973. Athos, Docheiariou 51.</p>
<p>974. Athos, Docheiariou 52.</p>
<p>975. Athos, Docheiariou 55.</p>
<p>976. Athos, Docheiariou 56.</p>
<p>977. Athos, Docheiariou 59.</p>
<p>978. Athos, Docheiariou 76.</p>
<p>979. Athos, Docheiariou 142.</p>
<p>980. Athos, Esphigmenou 25.</p>
<p>981. Athos, Esphigmenou 26.</p>
<p>982. Athos, Esphigmenou 27.</p>
<p>983. Athos, Esphigmenou 29.</p>
<p>984. Athos, Esphigmenou 30.</p>
<p>985. Athos, Esphigmenou 31.</p>
<p>986. Athos, Esphigmenou 186.</p>
<p>987. Athos, Zographou 4 [xii], 8vo, ff. 176.  Repaired with paper
leaves at beginning and end.</p>
<p>988. Athos, Zographou 14 [1674], 8vo. Written by one Theocletus.</p>
<p>989. Athos, Iveron 2.</p>
<p>990. Athos, Iveron 5.</p>
<p>991. Athos, Iveron 7.</p>
<p>992. Athos, Iveron 9.</p>
<p>993. Athos, Iveron 18.</p>
<p>994. Athos, Iveron 19.</p>
<p>995. Athos, Iveron 21.</p>
<p>996. Athos, Iveron 28. (Act. 278, Paul. 431.)</p>
<p>997. Athos, Iveron 29. (Act. 279, Paul. 432.)</p>
<p>998. Athos, Iveron 30.</p>
<p>999. Athos, Iveron 31. (Act. 280, Paul. 433.)</p>
<p>1000. Athos, Iveron 32.</p>
<p>1001. Athos, Iveron 33.</p>
<p>1002. Athos, Iveron 51.</p>
<p>1003. Athos, Iveron 52.</p>
<p>1004. Athos, Iveron 53.</p>
<p>1005. Athos, Iveron 55.</p>
<p>1006. Athos, Iveron 56.</p>
<p>1007. Athos, Iveron 59.</p>
<p>1008. Athos, Iveron 61.</p>
<p>1009. Athos, Iveron 63.</p>
<p>1010. Athos, Iveron 66.</p>
<p>1011. Athos, Iveron 67.</p>
<p>1012. Athos, Iveron 68.</p>
<p>1013. Athos, Iveron 69.</p>
<p>1014. Athos, Iveron 72.</p>
<p>1015. Athos, Iveron 75.</p>
<p>1016. Athos, Iveron 371.</p>
<p>1017. Athos, Iveron 548.</p>
<p>1018. Athos, Iveron 549.</p>
<p>1019. Athos, Iveron 550.</p>
<p>1020. Athos, Iveron 562.</p>
<p>1021. Athos, Iveron 599.</p>
<p>1022. Athos, Iveron 607.</p>
<p>1023. Athos, Iveron 608.</p>
<p>1024. Athos, Iveron 610.</p>
<p>1025. Athos, Iveron 636.</p>
<p>1026. Athos, Iveron 641.</p>
<p>1027. Athos, Iveron 647.</p>
<p>1028. Athos, Iveron 665.</p>
<p>1029. Athos, Iveron 671.</p>
<p>1030. Athos, Iveron 809.</p>
<p>1031. Athos, Iveron 871.</p>
<p>1032. Athos, Caracalla 19.</p>
<p>1033. Athos, Caracalla 20.</p>

<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>

<p>1034. Athos, Caracalla 31.</p>
<p>1035. Athos, Caracalla 34.</p>
<p>1036. Athos, Caracalla 35.</p>
<p>1037. Athos, Caracalla 36.</p>
<p>1038. Athos, Caracalla 37.</p>
<p>1039. Athos, Caracalla 111.</p>
<p>1040. Athos, Caracalla 121.</p>
<p>1041. Athos, Caracalla 128.</p>
<p>1042. Athos, Caracalla 198.</p>
<p>1043. Athos, Constamonitou 1. Theophylact on SS. Matt. and John?</p>
<p>1044. Athos, Constamonitou 61 [xvi], 8vo, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi></p>
<p>1045. Athos, Constamonitou 106 [xiii], 16mo. Begins with St. Luke.</p>
<p>1046. Athos, Coutloumoussi 67.</p>
<p>1047. Athos, Coutloumoussi 68.</p>
<p>1048. Athos, Coutloumoussi 69.</p>
<p>1049. Athos, Coutloumoussi 70.</p>
<p>1050. Athos, Coutloumoussi 71.</p>
<p>1051. Athos, Coutloumoussi 72.</p>
<p>1052. Athos, Coutloumoussi 73.</p>
<p>1053. Athos, Coutloumoussi 74.</p>
<p>1054. Athos, Coutloumoussi 75.</p>
<p>1055. Athos, Coutloumoussi 76.</p>
<p>1056. Athos, Coutloumoussi 77.</p>
<p>1057. Athos, Coutloumoussi 78.</p>
<p>1058. Athos, Coutloumoussi 90<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>. (Act. 283, Paul. 472.)</p>
<p>1059. Athos, Coutloumoussi 278.</p>
<p>1060. Athos, Coutloumoussi 281.</p>
<p>1061. Athos, Coutloumoussi 283.</p>
<p>1062. Athos, Coutloumoussi 284.</p>
<p>1063. Athos, Coutloumoussi 285.</p>
<p>1064. Athos, Coutloumoussi 286.</p>
<p>1065. Athos, Coutloumoussi 287.</p>
<p>1066. Athos, Coutloumoussi 288.</p>
<p>1067. Athos, Coutloumoussi 289.</p>
<p>1068. Athos, Coutloumoussi 290.</p>
<p>1069. Athos, Coutloumoussi 291.</p>
<p>1070. Athos, Coutloumoussi 293.</p>
<p>1071. Athos, Laura*.</p>
<p>1072. (Act. 284, Paul. 476, Apoc. 160.) Athos, Laura*.</p>
<p>1073. (Act. 285.) Athos, Laura *.</p>
<p>1074. Athos, Laura *.</p>
<p>1075. (Act. 286, Paul. 478, Apoc. 161.) Athos, Laura*.</p>
<p>1076. Athos, Laura *.</p>
<p>1077. Athos, Laura *.</p>
<p>1078. Athos, Laura *.</p>
<p>1079. Athos, Laura *.</p>
<p>1080. Athos, Laura *.</p>

<p>
* Dr. Gregory has seen these ten MSS., but gives no press-mark.
</p>

<p>1081. Athos, Xeropotamou 103.</p>
<p>1082. Athos, Xeropotamou 105.</p>
<p>1083. Athos, Xeropotamou 107.</p>
<p>1084. Athos, Xeropotamou 108.</p>
<p>1085. Athos, Xeropotamou 115.</p>
<p>1086. Athos, Xeropotamou 123.</p>
<p>1087. Athos, Xeropotamou 200.</p>
<p>1088. Athos, Xeropotamou 205.</p>
<p>1089. Athos, Xeropotamou 221.</p>
<p>1090. Athos, in Ecclesia.</p>
<p>1091. Athos, Panteleemon xxv.</p>
<p>1092. Athos, Panteleemon xxvi.</p>
<p>1093. Athos, Panteleemon xxviii.</p>
<p>1094. (Act. 287, Paul. 480, Apoc. 182.) Athos, Panteleemon xxix.</p>
<p>1095. Athos, Paul 4 [xiv], 8vo, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi></p>

<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>

<p>1096. Athos, Paul 5 [xiii], 8vo. A leaf, 2 cols., of St. Matt, added at
the end.</p>
<p>1097. Athos, Protaton 41 [x], 8vo. With histories of the Evangelists.</p>
<p>1098. Athos, Simopetra 25.</p>
<p>1099. Athos, Simopetra 26.</p>
<p>1100. Athos, Simopetra 29.</p>
<p>1101. Athos, Simopetra (34 ?).</p>
<p>1102. Athos, Simopetra 38.</p>
<p>1103. Athos, Simopetra 39.</p>
<p>1104. Athos, Simopetra 40.</p>
<p>1105. Athos, Simopetra 41.</p>
<p>1106. Athos, Simopetra 63.</p>
<p>1107. Athos, Simopetra 145.</p>
<p>1108. Athos, Simopetra 146.</p>
<p>1109. Athos, Simopetra 147.</p>
<p>1110. Athos, Stauroniketa 43.</p>
<p>1111. Athos, Stauroniketa 53.</p>
<p>1112. Athos, Stauroniketa 54.</p>
<p>1113. Athos, Stauroniketa 56.</p>
<p>1114. Athos, Stauroniketa 70.</p>
<p>1115. Athos, Stauroniketa 97.</p>
<p>1116. Athos, Stauroniketa 127.</p>
<p>1117. Athos, Philotheou 5.</p>
<p>1118. Athos, Philotheou 21.</p>
<p>1119. Athos, Philotheou 22.</p>
<p>1120. Athos, Philotheou 33.</p>
<p>1121. Athos, Philotheou 39.</p>
<p>1122. Athos, Philotheou 41.</p>
<p>1123. Athos, Philotheou 44.</p>
<p>1124. Athos, Philotheou 45.</p>
<p>1125. Athos, Philotheou 46.</p>
<p>1126. Athos, Philotheou 47.</p>
<p>1127. Athos, Philotheou 48.</p>
<p>1128. Athos, Philotheou 51.</p>
<p>1129. Athos, Philotheou 53.</p>
<p>1130. Athos, Philotheou 68.</p>
<p>1131. Athos, Philotheou 71.</p>
<p>1132. Athos, Philotheou 72.</p>
<p>1133. Athos, Philotheou 74.</p>
<p>1134. Athos, Philotheou 77.</p>
<p>1135. Athos, Philotheou 78.</p>
<p>1136. Athos, Philotheou 80.</p>
<p>1137. Athos, Philotheou 86.</p>
<p>1138. Athos, Chiliandari 5 [xii], 8vo, <hi rend='italic'>orn</hi>.</p>
<p>1139. Athos, Chiliandari 19 [xviii], 8vo, <hi rend='italic'>chart</hi>.</p>
<p>1140. Athos, Chiliandari 105 [xiv], 4to. Golden letters, very handsome,
11 lines, 2 cols.</p>
<p>1141. Berat, Archbp.</p>
<p>1142. Berat, Mangalemine Church.</p>
<p>1143. Berat, Church τοῦ εὐαγγελιστμοῦ.</p>
<p>1144. New York, Syracuse. (Greg. 668.)</p>
<p>1145. Athens, Nat. Libr. 13 [xv], 5-1/8 × 4, ff. 299.</p>
<p>1146. Ath. Nat. Libr. 139 [xv], 6-3/8 × 4-3/8, ff. 444.  <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> at beg. and
end. With commentary. Two palimpsest leaves [viii].</p>
<p>1147. Ath. Nat. Libr. 347 [ix-x], 7-7/8 × 5 1/8, ff. 131. Palimpsest. Other
writing. Hymns and Prayers [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1406],</p>
<p>1148. Jerusalem, Patriarchal Library 25 [xi], 11-3/8 × 9-½, ff. 273 (17),
<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>proll.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>scholia.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> from fire and damp, Luke i. 1-25;
John xxi. 17-end; ff. 127, 128 partially mutilated<note place='foot'>For all these MSS. (Evann. 1148, 1149, 1261, 1262, 1263, 1265-1268, 1274-1279),
<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Ἱεροσολομιτικὴ Βιβλιοθήκη, κ.τ.λ., ὑπὸ Α. Παπαδοπούλου Π. Κεραμέως. Τόμος
Πρῶτος. Ἐν Πετρουπόλει, 1891.</note>.</p>

<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>

<p>1149. (Paul. 53.) Jerus. Patr. Libr. 28 [xi], 11 × 9-¼, ff. 212 (21), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>scholia.</hi> Brought in 1562 by Peter τοῦ Καραμανίτου.</p>
<p>1150. Constantinople, St. Sepulchre 227.</p>
<p>1151. Constantinople, St. Sepulch. 417.</p>
<p>1152. Constantinople, St. Sepulch. 419.</p>
<p>1153. Constantinople, St. Sepulch. 435.</p>
<p>1154. Constantinople, St. Sepulch. 439.</p>
<p>1155. Constantinople, St. Sepulch. 441.</p>

<p>
1156. Lesbos, Mon. τοῦ Λείμωνος 356. Commentary of St. Chrysostom
on St. John, and commentary of Theophylact on St. Matt., perhaps with
St. Matt, [xiv], 12-¾ × 10-¼, by the hand of Michael the monk, partly on
vellum (ff. 1-4, and 121-125, 2 cols.), chiefly on cotton (ff. 116, 1 col.).
(Papadop. Kar. Παράρτημα τοῦ Ιϛ τόμου. Constantinople, 1885.)
</p>

<p>
1157. Lesb. Mon. τοῦ Λείμων. 67 [xi], 9-¼ × 7-1/8, ff. 395, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>
Latin between the lines of John i. 1-12.
1158. Lesb. Mon. τοῦ Λείμων. 97 <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> [xv], 7-7/8 × 5-¾, with two vellum
leaves [xi].
1159. Lesb. Mon. τοῦ Λείμων. 99 [xiv, end], 9-½ × 6-3/8, ?, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, Luke
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, John wanting.
</p>

<p>1160. Patmos 58.</p>
<p>1161. Patmos 59 [x], 4to. Seen by Coxe.</p>
<p>1162. Patmos 60.</p>
<p>1163. Patmos 76.</p>
<p>1164. Patmos 80.</p>
<p>1165. Patmos 81.</p>
<p>1166. Patmos 82.</p>
<p>1167. Patmos 83.</p>
<p>1168. Patmos 84.</p>
<p>1169. Patmos 90.</p>
<p>1170. Patmos 92.</p>
<p>1171. Patmos 94.</p>
<p>1172. Patmos 95.</p>
<p>1173. Patmos 96.</p>
<p>1174. Patmos 97.</p>
<p>1175. Patmos 98.</p>
<p>1176. Patmos 100.</p>
<p>1177. Patmos 117.</p>
<p>1178. Patmos 203.</p>
<p>1179. Patmos 275.</p>
<p>1180. Patmos 333.</p>
<p>1181. Patmos 335</p>
<p>1182. Thessalonica, ἑλληνικοῦ γυμνασίου 6.</p>
<p>1183. Thess. ἑλλην. γυμνας. 11.</p>
<p>1184. Thess., at the house of <hi rend='italic'>Ku.</hi> Σπυρίου.</p>
<p>1185. Sinai, Mt. Catherine 148.</p>
<p>1186. Sinai, Mt. Catherine 149.</p>
<p>1187. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 150.</p>
<p>1188. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 151.</p>
<p>1189. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 152.</p>
<p>1190. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 153.</p>
<p>1191. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 154.</p>
<p>1192. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 155.</p>
<p>1193. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 156.</p>
<p>1194. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 157.</p>
<p>1195. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 158.</p>
<p>1196. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 159.</p>
<p>1197. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 160.</p>
<p>1198. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 161.</p>
<p>1199. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 162.</p>
<p>1200. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 163.</p>
<p>1201. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 164.</p>
<p>1202. (Act. 417.) Sinai, Mt. Cath. 165.</p>
<p>1203. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 166.</p>
<p>1204. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 167.</p>

<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>

<p>1205. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 168.</p>
<p>1206. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 169.</p>
<p>1207. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 170.</p>
<p>1208. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 171.</p>
<p>1209. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 172.</p>
<p>1210. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 173.</p>
<p>1211. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 174.</p>
<p>1212. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 175.</p>
<p>1213. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 176.</p>
<p>1214. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 177.</p>
<p>1215. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 178.</p>
<p>1216. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 179.</p>
<p>1217. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 180.</p>
<p>1218. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 181.</p>
<p>1219. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 182.</p>
<p>1220. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 183.</p>
<p>1221. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 184.</p>
<p>1222. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 185.</p>
<p>1223. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 186.</p>
<p>1224. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 187.</p>
<p>1225. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 188.</p>
<p>1226. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 189.</p>
<p>1227. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 190.</p>
<p>1228. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 191.</p>
<p>1229. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 192.</p>
<p>1230. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 193.</p>
<p>1231. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 194.</p>
<p>1232. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 195.</p>
<p>1233. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 196.</p>
<p>1234. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 197.</p>
<p>1235. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 198.</p>
<p>1236. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 199.</p>
<p>1237. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 200.</p>
<p>1238. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 201.</p>
<p>1239. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 203.</p>
<p>1240. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 259.</p>
<p>1241. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 260.</p>
<p>1242. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 261.</p>
<p>1243. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 262.</p>
<p>1244. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 263.</p>
<p>1245. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 264.</p>
<p>1246. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 265.</p>
<p>1247. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 266.</p>
<p>1248. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 267.</p>
<p>1249. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 268.</p>
<p>1250. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 269.</p>
<p>1251. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 270.</p>
<p>1252. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 302.</p>
<p>1253. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 303.</p>
<p>1254. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 304.</p>
<p>1255. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 305.</p>
<p>1256. Sinai, Mt. Cath. 306.</p>
<p>1257. Smyrna, Schol. Evan. Γ᾽. 1.</p>
<p>1258. Smyrn. Schol. Evan. Γ᾽. 2.</p>
<p>1259. Smyrn. Schol. Evan. Γ᾽. 5.</p>
<p>1260. Cortona, Bibl. Commun. 201.</p>
<p>1261. Jerusalem, Patriarch. Libr. 31 [xi], 10-½ × 8, ff. 295 (20), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> Brought from Tauronesus to Constantinople before 1683.
1262. (Act. 417, Paul. 57, Apoc. 153.) Jerus. Patr. Libr. 37 [xi],
9-3/8 × 7, ff. 355 (31), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>proll.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>glossary,</hi> κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> end of
1 Pet., Heb.-end. Has signature of Patriarch Sophronius, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1604-5.
According to another note Thomas and Georgilas and their relatives
offered it in 1589.</p>
<p>1263. Jerus. Patr. Libr. 41 [xi], 9-¼ × 6-½, ff. 298 (21), of which three
are plain, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>pict</hi>. Fine letters.</p>
<p>1264. Paris, Nat. Coislin. Gr. 201.</p>
<p>1265. Jerus. Patr. Libr. 42 [xi], 9 × 7-½, 248 (19), τίτλ., κεφ. (gold). <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi>
at beginning of each Evangelist, and several leaves cut off at the end.
</p>

<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>

<p>
1266. Jerus. Patr. Libr. 46 [xii], 8-½ × 6-3/8, ff. 278 (25), one leaf cut out
after f. 80, and ff. 15 and 16 palimpsest.
</p>

<p>
1267. (Act. 329, Paul. 380.) Jerus. Patr. Libr. 47 [xi], 8-5/8 × 6-½, ff.
216 (40), 130-137 being cotton [xiii], <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> Very beautiful.
Brought from Cyprus.
</p>

<p>
1268. Jerus. Patr. Libr. 48 [xi], 8 × 6-3/8, ff. 258 (7 being plain), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1269. Rom. Vat. Urb. 4.
</p>

<p>
1270. Cairo, Patriarch. Alex. 82.
</p>

<p>
1271. Cairo, Patriarch. Alex. 87.
</p>

<p>
1272. Athens, Nat. 111.
</p>

<p>
1273. Auckland (New Zealand), City Library.
</p>

<p>
1274. Jerus. Patr. Libr. 49 [xi, 1st quarter], 8-¼ × 6-5/8, ff. 306 (18),
8 being blank, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> (gold), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1275. Jerus. Patr. Libr. 56 [xi], 7-¼ × 5-¾, ff. 218 (23), <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi> (κανόνιον ?),
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> Came from St. Saba.
</p>

<p>
1276. Jerus. Patr. Libr. 59 [xi], 5-½ × 4-¼, ff. 299 (23), 12 blank, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> First page in vermilion, rest in gold. Written in
Palestine.
</p>

<p>
1277. Jerus. Patr. Libr. 60 [xi], 5-½ × 4-3/8, ff. 299 (23), 12 blank, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi> (κανόνιον), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> First page in vermilion, rest in gold on
purple.
</p>

<p>
1278. Jerus. Patr. Libr. 62 [May 1, 1721], ?, ff. 385, 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> In
Greek and Turkish (written in Greek letters). <hi rend='italic'>Prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1279. Jerus. Patr. Libr. 139 [xiv], 11-3/8 × 8-¼, ff. 124 (34), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1280. Lesbos, τ. Λείμωνος μονῆς 141 [xv], 8-5/8 × 5-7/8, ff. ?, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi>
beginning and end, and in other places.
</p>

<p>
1281. Lesbos, τ. Λείμωνος μονῆς 145 [xv], 8-½ × 5-¾. <hi rend='italic'>Chart.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1282. Lesbos, τ. Λείμωνος μονῆς 227 [xii], 6-½ × 5-1/8, ff. 136. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt.
i. 1-vii. 5; Mark i. 1-15; Luke xix. 32-John xxi. 25.
</p>

<p>
1283. Lesbos, Μανταμάδου, Ταξίαρχοι ΚΑ [xiii], 8-5/8 × 6-½, ff. 288. Written
by one Macarius.
</p>

<p>
1284. Mitylene, Libr. of Gymnasion 9 [xii-xiii], 10-¼ × 7-½, ff. 292 +
8 <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1285. Mityl. Libr. Gym. 41 [x], 7-1/8 × 5-3/8, ff. 258. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> at beginning,
&amp;c. ff. 3 [xiii].
</p>

<p>
1286. Andros, Μονὴ ἁγία 1 [1156], size not given, ff. 342 (20), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1287. Andros, Μ. ἁγ. 33 [xii-xiii]. One leaf <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1288. Andros, Μ. ἁγ. 34 [1523], 6 ff. at end <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> Well written.
</p>

<p>
1289. Andros, Μ. ἁγ. 35. Like the last, several perished folios have
been replaced by paper ones.
</p>

<p>
1290. Andros, Μ. ἁγ. 37 [xii]. Sumptuous binding with precious
stones and silver tablets.
</p>

<p>
1291. Andros, Μ. ἁγ. 38. <hi rend='italic'>Chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1292. Andros, Μ. ἁγ. 48 [1709]. Beautiful and perfect. Κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>

<p>
1293. Andros, Μ. ἁγ. 49 [1234]. Κεφ. and other ornaments cut out.
Like 34.
</p>

<p>
1294. Andros, Μ. ἁγ. 50 [xii-xiii]. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> at beginning and end, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
1295. Kosinitsa, Mon. Libr. 219 [1285].
</p>

<p>
1296. Kosinitsa, Mon. Libr. 58 [ix-x], 12 × 8, ff. 288. <hi rend='italic'>Pict.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>proll.</hi> (various), <hi rend='italic'>scholia.</hi> Written in early minuscules.
</p>

<p>
1297. (Act. 416, Paul. 377.) Kosinitsa, Mon. Libr. 216 [?], 7-¾ × 5-¾, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1298. Kosinitsa, Mon. Libr. 217, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1299. Kosinitsa, Mon. Libr. 218, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1300. Kosinitsa, Mon. Libr. 219.
</p>

<p>
1301. Kosinitsa, Mon. Libr. 220.
</p>

<p>
1302. Kosinitsa, Mon. Libr. 222.
</p>

<p>
1303. Kosinitsa, Mon. Libr. 223 [1471], ?, ff. 201.
</p>

<p>
1304. Kosinitsa, Mon. Libr. 198.
</p>

<p>
1305. Athos, Protaton 15 [xi], 2 cols.
</p>

<p>
1306. Athos, Prot. 44 [xiv], 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1307. Athos, Paul. 1 [xiv], 4to, ff. 50. Written by one Matthew. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1308. Athos, Chiliandari 6 [xiii], 8vo. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> at beginning and elsewhere.
</p>

<p>
1309. Athos, Constamonitou 99 [xiv]. Palimpsest over Latin Lives
and Martyrdom of Saints [xii].
</p>

<p>
1310. Athos, Xenophon 1 [1181], 4to, 2 cols. Written by John,
a reader from Buthrotus.
</p>

<p>
1311. Athos, Xenophon 3 [xiii], 8vo, 2 cols. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1312. Athos, Xenophon 58 [xvi], 8vo, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1313. Athens, Nat. Libr. 72 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1181], 10-5/8 × 7-7/8, ff. 191.
</p>

<p>
1314. Ath. Nat. Libr. 92 [xiv], 5-1/8 × 4, ff. 277, <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
with a peculiar description of the Eusebian Canons.
</p>

<p>
1315. Ath. Nat. Libr. 113 [xi], 7-½ × 5-½, ff. 232.
</p>

<p>
1316. Ath. Nat. Libr. 123 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1145], 8-¼ × 5-7/8, ff. 189, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1317. Ath. Nat. Libr. 128 [xii], 6-¾ × 5-7/8, ff. 181.
</p>

<p>
1318. Ath. Nat. Libr. 132 [x], 6-3/8 × 4-¾, ff. 210.
</p>

<p>
1319. Ath. Nat. Libr. 135 [xv], 9 × 7-1/8, ff. 150.
</p>

<p>
1320. Earl of Crawford 1 [xi], 8-1/8 × 6-1/8, ff. 239 (25), <hi rend='italic'>Carp.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ. in blue by another hand), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> with ἀρχ. and τέλ. later,
<hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Eus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> Exquisitely written and ornamented.
Perfect, except that κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> in Matt. is torn out. Memorandum on last
leaf of the birth of Theodora [Oct. 2, 1320].
</p>

<p>
1321. Earl of Crawford 2 [xi-xii], 5-½ × 4, ff. 240 (21, 20), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., τιτλ., <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi> (Luke), <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> Beautifully
written, though not equal to the last. Has suffered from age. Written
by Paul a monk. The third leaf in St. Luke lost: otherwise perfect.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter X. Cursive Manuscripts Of The Acts And Catholic Epistles.</head>

<p>
*1. (Evan. 1.)
</p>

<p>
2. (Paul. 2.) Basil. Univ. A. N. iv. 4 (formerly B. ix. 38) [xiii or xiv
Burgon], 5-7/8 × 3-7/8, ff. 216 (27), with short Introductions to the books,
once belonged to the Preaching Friars, then to Amerbach, a printer of
Basle. Erasmus grounded on this copy, in some passages with some
alterations of the MS., the text of his first edition (1516), and he calls it
<q>exemplar mirè castigatum.</q> His binder cut off a considerable part of
the margin (Hoskier). It is Mill's B. 2 (Battier, Wetstein).
</p>

<p>
3. (Evan. 3.)
</p>

<p>
4. (Paul. 4.) Basil. A. N. iv. 5 (formerly B. x. 20) [xv], 6-1/8 × 4-3/8, ff. 287
(18), Mill's B. 3, badly written by several hands, and full of contractions:
the Pauline Epistles preceding the Catholic. Erasmus made
some use of this copy and of its marginal readings (e.g. Acts viii. 37;
xv. 34; xxiv. 6-8) for forming his text (Battier, Wetstein).
</p>

<p>
5. (Evan. 5.)
</p>

<p>
6. (Evan. 6.)
</p>

<p>
7. (Paul. 9.) Paris, Nat. Gr. 102 [x, Greg. xi, Omont xii], 7-¼ × 5-7/8,
ff. 390 (20), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, seems to be Stephen's ι᾽, although ι᾽ is
cited in error Luke v. 19; John ii. 17: it nearly resembles Cod. 5 and
the Latin version. In this copy, and in Paul. H, 12, 17, 20, 137,
Mr. Vansittart re-collated the beginning of the Epistle to the Hebrews.
</p>

<p>
8. (Paul. 10.) Stephen's ια᾽, now missing, cited about 400 times by
that editor, in 276 of which it supports the Latin versions (Mill, N. T.,
Proleg. § 1171). Stephen cites ια᾽ (apparently in error) four times in the
Gospels, once in the Apocalypse (Matt. x. 8; 10; xii. 32; John ii. 17;
Apoc. xiii. 4).
</p>

<p>
9. (Paul. 11.) Cambridge, Univ. Libr. Kk. 6. 4 [xi], 6-¾ × 4-¾, ff. 247
(22), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Acts iii. 6-17; 1 Tim. iv. 12-2 Tim. iv. 3; Heb. vii.
20-xi. 10; xi. 23-end. Bp. Marsh has fully proved that this copy,
which once belonged to Stephen's friend Vatablus, Professor of Hebrew
at Paris, is his ιγ᾽. This copy also is twice quoted by Stephen in the
Gospels (Matt. xxvii. 64; John ii. 17), through mere oversight. Dr. Hort
states that it is rich in detached readings in Cath. Epp., not in Acts
or Paul.
</p>

<p>
10. (Paul. 12, Apoc. 2.) Par. Nat. Gr. 237, Stephen's ιε᾽ [x], 8-1/8 × 6-3/8,
ff. 246 (28), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., neatly written, with
scholia and other matter. Le Long identified this, and about five other
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
of Stephen's manuscripts: its value in the Apocalypse is considerable
(Wetstein, Scholz).
</p>

<p>
11. (Paul. 140.) Par. Nat. Gr. 103 [x, Greg. xi], 8-½ × 6-¾, ff. 333(18),
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, with scholia. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Acts ii. 20-31.
</p>

<p>
12. (Paul. 16, Apoc. 4.) Par. Nat. Gr. 219 [xi], 12-3/8 × 9-1/8, ff. 313 (40),
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, neat, with Arethas' commentary on the
Apocalypse, and Œcumenius' on the other books. Like Evann. 16, 19,
317, it once belonged to the Medici: in 1518 it was given by the Greek
Janus Lascar to <q>Petro Masieli</q> of Constance, and was used by Donatus of
Verona for an edition of Œcumenius (Wetstein, Scholz).
</p>

<p>
*13. (Evan. 33.)
</p>

<p>
14. (Evan. 35.)
</p>

<p>
15. Par. Nat. Coislin. 25 [xi], 12-3/8 × 9-¼, ff. 254 (36), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., described by Montfaucon (as were also Act. 16-18),
compared with Pamphilus' revision, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, and a commentary digested by
Andreas, a priest (Wetstein).
</p>

<p>
16. (Paul. 19.) Par. Nat. Coisl. 26 [xi, Greg. x], 11-5/8 × 9, ff. 381 (40),
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, with a commentary much like that of Œcumenius, and a catena of
various Fathers: also a life of St. Longinus on two leaves [ix]. It once
belonged to the monastery of St. Athanasius on Athos, βιβλίον τῆς τετάρτης
θέσεως (Wetstein).
</p>

<p>
17. (Paul. 21, Apoc. 19.) Par. Nat. Coisl. 205 [written by Anthony,
a monk, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1079, Indict. 2], 9-7/8 × 7, ff. 270 (27), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> 1 Cor. xvi. 17-2 Cor. i. 7; Heb. xiii.
15-25; with Apoc. i. 1-ii. 5 in a recent hand (Wetstein).
</p>

<p>
18. (Paul. 22, Apoc. 18.) Par. Nat. Coisl. 202, 2, ff. 1-26 [xi] on
vellum, the rest [xiii] on cotton paper, 9-5/8 × 7-1/8, ff. 302 (22), with scholia
to the Acts and Catholic Epistles, Andreas' commentary to the Apocalypse,
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> to St. Paul's Epistles (Wetstein).
</p>

<p>
19. (Evan. 38.)
</p>

<p>
20. (Paul. 25.) Brit. Mus. Royal MS. I. B. I, once Westminster 935
[xiv], 10 × 7-¾, ff. 144 (22), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Euthal.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> in Cath. and Paul. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi>
and in bad condition, almost illegible in parts (Wetstein). The Pauline
Epistles precede the Acts and Catholic Epistles. Casley notices one leaf
lost in the Hebrews (after ὡς υἱοῖς ὑμῖν πρός ch. xii. 7).
</p>

<p>
21. (Paul. 26.) Cambridge, Univ. Libr. Dd. xi. 90 [xiii], 6-½ × 5-¼, ff. 159
(24), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, στίχ. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Acts i-xii. 2; xiv. 22-xv. 10; Rom. xv.
14-16; 24-26; xvi. 4-20; 1 Cor. i. 15-iii. 12; 2 Tim. i. 1-ii. 4;
Tit. i. 9-ii. 15; Philem. ii-end of Hebrews. <hi rend='italic'>Prol.</hi> to Pauline Epistles
only, copy is Mill's <hi rend='italic'>Lu</hi>., but he forgot to name it in his Prolegomena.
It was re-discovered and collated by Wetstein, and is probably Bentley's
Q (Ellis, Bentleii Critica Sacra, p. xxix). John Berriman, in the
manuscript notes to his own copy of his <q>Critical Dissertation on 1 Tim.
iii. 16</q> (1741), which he presented to the British Museum in 1761, tells
us that this codex [then Cant. 495] was identified <q>by several collations
of many texts by different hands (Professor Francklin and others), and
by other circumstances</q> to have been Professor Luke's (MS. note on
p. 104).
</p>

<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>

<p>
22. (Paul. 75 in the same hand.) Brit. Mus. Add. 5115 and 5116, once
Dr. Mead's (Berriman), then Askew's [xii], 7-5/8 × 5-¾, ff. 127 + 174 (22),
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (later). <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Acts i. 1-11: (Acts i-xx
collated by Paulus for Griesbach: Bloomfield): Scholz's date [ix] is
an error.
</p>

<p>
23. (Paul. 28, Apoc. 6.) Oxf. Bodl. Barocc. 3 [xi], 5 × 4, ff. 297 (21),
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> (Euth.), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, a beautiful little book, written at Ephesus, beginning
Acts xi. 13, ending Apoc. xx. 1: the opening chapters are supplied in a
late hand. Tregelles calls this <q>a very obscure manuscript.</q> With
scholia on the Epistles, and a full and unique commentary on the Apocalypse,
edited by J. A. Cramer, 1840 (Mill, Caspar Wetstein, Griesbach).
This copy is Bentley's χ in Trin. Coll. B. xvii. 5 (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 51).
<hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Acts iii. 10-xi. 13; xiv. 6-xvii. 19; xx. 28-xxiv. 12; 1 Pet.
ii. 2-16; iii. 7-21; 2 Cor. ix. 15-xi. 9; Gal. i. 1-18; Eph. vi. 1-19;
Phil. iv. 18-23; Rev. i. 10-17; ix. 12-18; xvii. 10-xviii. 8, and in
other places.
</p>

<p>
*24. (Paul. 29.) Camb. Christ's Coll. F. 1. 13 [xii], 8-1/8 × 6, ff. 303
(22). <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Acts i. 1-11; xviii. 20-xx. 14; James v. 14-1 Pet. i. 4,
and some leaves of this fine copy are torn or decayed: there are also
many changes by a later hand (Mill's Cant. 2, Scrivener's 1): unpublished
collations were made by Bentley (Trin. Coll. Camb. B. xvii. 10, 11),
and by Jo. Wigley for Jackson (Jesus Coll. Camb. O. Θ. 1).
</p>

<p>
25. (Paul. 31, Apoc. 7.) Brit. Mus. Harl. 5537 [Pentecost, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1087,
Indict. 10], 4-½ × 3-½, ff. 286 (23), (with a lexicon, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., some <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., an important copy, from the neighbourhood
of the Aegean. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> 1 John v. 14-2 John 6 (Mill, Griesbach, Bloomfield,
Scrivener's 1 in Apoc.)<note place='foot'>Mr. Ellis (Bentleii Critica Sacra, pp. xxviii, xxix) represents, among facts
which I am better able to verify, that Act. and Epp. 25, 26, and Epp. 15, were
collated by Wetstein, and his labours preserved at Trin. Coll. Cambridge (B. xvii.
10, 11). The manuscripts he indicates so ambiguously must be Paul. 25, 26, and
Act. 15, since Wetstein is not known to have worked at Act. 25, 26, or Paul. 15.</note>.
</p>

<p>
26. (Paul. 32.) Brit. Mus. Harl. 5557 [xii], 7 × 6, ff. 293 (22), <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> Paul.), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, some <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> and στίχ. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Acts i. 1-11;
1 Cor. xi. 7-xv. 56. This copy and the next bear Covell's emblem
<q><hi rend='italic'>Luceo,</hi></q> and the date Constantinople, 1675, but he got Act. 27 from
Adrianople. (Mill, Paulus in Acts i-iii Bloomfield.)
</p>

<p>
27. (Paul. 33.) Brit. Mus. Harl. 5620 [xv], 8-¼ × 6, ff. 134 (22), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>,
is of some weight: there are no chapter-divisions <foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign>; the
writing is small and abbreviated (Mill, Griesbach, Bloomfield).
</p>

<p>
28. (Paul. 34, Apoc. 8.) Brit. Mus. Harl. 5778, is Covell's 5 or Sinai
manuscript<note place='foot'>Covell once marked this codex 5, but afterwards gave it the name of the
Sinai MS. (little anticipating worthier claimants for that appellation), reserving
5 for Harl. 5777 or Evan. 446.</note> [xii], 8-¾ × 6-½, ff. 156 (30), κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., in
wretched condition, and often illegible. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Acts i. 1-20; Apoc. vi. 14-viii.
1; xxii. 19-21, perhaps elsewhere (Mill, Bloomfield for Act., Paul.,
Scrivener's d for Apoc.).
</p>

<p>
29. (Paul. 35.) Geneva, Libr. 20 [xi or xii], 5-3/8 × 4, ff. 269 (18),
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
brought from Greece, beautifully but carelessly written, without subscriptions;
in text much like Act. 27 (readings sent to Mill, Scholz).
</p>

<p>
30. (Paul. 36, Apoc. 9.) Oxf. Bodleian Misc. Gr. 74 [xi], 10-¾ × 7, ff.
333 (24), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, some κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., brought from the East
by Bp. Huntington, beginning Acts xv. 19, but 3 John, Jude, the
Apocalypse, and St. Paul's Epistles (which stand last) are in a somewhat
earlier hand than the rest. (Mill's Hunt. 1.)
</p>

<p>
*31. (Evan. 69.)
</p>

<p>
32. (Evan. 51.)
</p>

<p>
33. (Paul. 39.) Oxf. Lincoln Coll. Gr. 15 B. 82 [xii], 7-5/8 × 6, ff. 206
(27), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, some τίτλ., στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, presented in 1483 by
Robert Flemmyng, Dean of Lincoln, a beautiful and interesting codex,
with <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, and the numbers of the στίχοι noted in
the subscriptions. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> 2 Pet. i. 1-15; Rom. i. 1-20 (Walton's Polyglott,
Mill, Dobbin <q>Cod. Montfort.,</q> who regards it as the manuscript
from which this portion of the latter was mainly copied). The Epistle
of Jude stands between James and 1 Peter. Vansittart notes its affinity
in text with Act. 13.
</p>

<p>
*34. (Evan. 61.)
</p>

<p>
35. (Evan. 57.)
</p>

<p>
36. Oxf. New College, 36 (58) [xii, end], 10 × 7-¾, ff. 245 (39), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., valuable text, with a catena of Fathers, enumerated by Mill
(N. T., Proleg. § 1390), and edited by Cramer, Oxford, 1838 (Walton's
Polyglott, Mill).
</p>

<p>
37. (Paul. 43.) Oxf. New Coll. 37 (59) [xiii], 9-¼ × 6-5/8, ff. 298 (20),
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., perhaps a little later than Cod. 36, erroneously
described by Walton, and after him by Wetstein, as part of Evan. 58,
a much later manuscript. Heb. xiii. 21-25 is supplied in a recent hand.
It is a beautiful copy, with marginal glosses (Walton's Polyglott, Mill,
Dobbin).
</p>

<p>
*38. (Paul. 44.) Lugduno-Batav. 77, Voss. Gr. Q. 2 [xiii], 7-¼ × 5-¼,
ff. 215 (22), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, once belonging to
Petavius, a Councillor of Paris, given by Queen Christina to Is. Vossius
(Mill, Wetstein, Dermout 1825).
</p>

<p>
39. (Paul. 45, Apoc. 11.) Petavii 2, age and present locality not
stated. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Acts i. 1-xviii. 22; James i. 1-v. 17; 3 John 9-Jude
25; 1 Cor. iii. 16-x. 13 (Extracts in Mill; J. Gachon).
</p>

<p>
40. (Paul. 46, Apoc. 12.) Vat. Reg. Gr. 179 [xi], 9-7/8 × 7-½, ff. 169 (27),
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, with a mixed text and
the end of Titus (from ch. iii. 3), Philemon, and the Apocalypse in a later
hand. This copy, given by Christina to Alexander VIII (1689-91), is of
considerable importance, and, as containing all Euthalius' labours on the
Acts and the Epistles, was largely used by Laur. Zacagni for his edition
of the Prologues, &amp;c., of Euthalius (Extracts in Mill, Zacagni, Birch;
Griesbach adds, <q>Gagnaeus eundem sub Dionysiani nomine laudasse
creditur</q>).
</p>

<p>
41. (Evan. 175.)
</p>

<p>
*42. (Paul. 48, Apoc. 13, Evst. 287, Apost. 56.) Frankfort on the
Oder Gymnasium, once Seidel's [xi], 8-1/8 × 5-7/8, ff. 302 (23), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ.,
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, carelessly written, with some rare readings. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Acts ii. 3-34
(xxvii. 19-34 is in a later hand); 2 Pet. i. 1, 2; 1 John v. 11-21;
Apoc. xviii. 3-13 (N. Westermann, H. Middeldorpf). One leaf of a Lectionary
is added, containing Matt. xvii. 16-23; 1 Cor. ix. 2-12. This
copy often agrees closely with the Complutensian text and Laud. 81
(Evan. 51) jointly.
</p>

<p>
43. (Evan. 76.)
</p>

<p>
44. (Like Evan. 82, Paul. 51, Apoc. 5) certain manuscripts cited by
Laurentius Valla. Dr. Hort's Cod. 44 is B.-C. III. 37, which is our
Act. 221, Paul. 265.
</p>

<p>
45. (Paul. 52, Apoc. 16.) Hamburg, City Library, Cod. Gr. 1252 [xv],
7-7/8 × 5-7/8, ff. 268 (22), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> With its companion Cod. M of
St. Paul's Epistles, it was lent to Wetstein in 1717 and to Bengel, by
Z. C. Uffenbach. It once belonged to Jo. Ciampini at Rome, is carelessly
written, but from a good text: <q>plura genuina omittens, quam aliena
admiscens,</q> Bengel.
</p>

<p>
46. (Paul. 55.) Monacensis Reg. 375 [xi, Greg. x], 12-½ × 9-3/8, ff. 381
(40), στίχ. (marked peculiarly in archaic fashion&mdash;J. R. Harris&mdash;e.g.
1 Cor. ΗΗΗΔΔ), is Bengel's Augustan. 6, with Œcumenius' commentary
and some rare readings (Bengel, Matthaei, Scholz). All the Augsburg
MSS. of the N. T. (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi>  Evann. 83, 426-8, Paul. 54, 125, 126) were
removed to Munich in 1806.
</p>

<p>
47. (Evan. 90.)
</p>

<p>
48. (Evan. 105.)
</p>

<p>
49. (Evan. 92.)
</p>

<p>
50. (Paul. 8.) Stephen's ζ' is unknown, though it was once in the
Royal Library at Paris; that is, if Evan. 8, Reg. 49, is Stephen's ζ᾽ in the
Gospels, which Mr. Vansittart seems to have proved. Stephen seldom
cites ζ᾽, or (as Mill puts the case) <q>textus ipsius ferè universus absorptus
est in hac editione</q> (N. T., Proleg. § 1167). <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Evan. 8.
</p>

<p>
51. (Paul. 133, Apoc. 52.) Paris, Nat. Gr. 56, once Mazarin's [xii],
10 × 6-3/8, ff. 375 (23), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Apoc. xxii. 17-21.
</p>

<p>
52. (Paul. 50.) Cod. Rhodiensis, some of whose readings Stunica,
the chief of the Complutensian editors, cites in controversy with
Erasmus: it may have been his own property, and cannot now be
identified. Whatever Mill states (on 1 John iii. 16), it is not now at
Alcalá.
</p>

<p>
*53. (Paul. 30.) Camb. Emman. Coll. i. 4. 35 [xii], 3-¾ × 3, ff. 214
(24), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., the writing being among the minutest and
most elegant extant. It is Mill's Cant. 3, Scrivener's n (a facsimile is
given Plate xii. No. 33), and is in bad condition, in parts almost illegible.
It begins 2 Pet. ii. 4, and there is a hiatus from 1 John iii. 20 to the
middle of Œcumenius' Prologue to the Romans: <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> also 1 Cor. xi. 7-xv.
56, and ends Heb. xi. 27. From 1 Tim. vi. 5 another and far less
careful hand begins: but the manuscript exhibits throughout many
abbreviations. Has some marginal notes <foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign>. Given to the
College <q>in Testimonium grati animi</q> by Sam. Wright, a member of the
College, in 1598.
</p>

<p>
54. (Evan. 43.) Paris, Arsenal Libr. The second volume of this book
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
(containing the Acts and all the Epistles on 189 leaves) is judged by the
present librarian to be a little more modern than the first volume.
They were both <q>ex dono R. P. de Berzian</q> (sic) to the Oratory of San
Maglorian.
</p>

<p>
55. Readings of a <emph>second</emph> copy of St. Jude contained in Cod. 47.
Tischendorf, in his eighth edition, cites this copy in Acts xvi. 6, apparently
by mistake.
</p>

<p>
56. (Paul. 227.) Oxf. Bodl. E. D. Clarke 4 [xii], 9 × 6, ff. 220 (27),
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> (names and miracles of Apostles, &amp;c.), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ.,
<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> (extracts, &amp;c. by Dean Gaisford).
</p>

<p>
(This number was assigned by Wetstein and Griesbach to certain
readings of four Medicean manuscripts (only one in the Acts), which, like
those of No. 102 of the Gospels, were found by Wetstein in the margin
of Rapheleng's Plantin Greek Testament (1591). Identical with Act.
84, 87-89.&mdash;Birch, Scholz.)
</p>

<p>
57. (Evan. 234.)
</p>

<p>
58. (Paul. 224.) Oxf. Bodl. Clarke 9 [xiii], 7 × 5, ff. 181 (26), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Heb. xiii. 7-25 (Gaisford). (58 of Wetstein is the same codex as
22; Scholz substitutes the above.)
</p>

<p>
59. (Paul. 62.) Brit. Mus. Harl. 5588 [xiii], 10 × 6-½, 132 (36), cotton
paper, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, full <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. On the first leaf we read <q>liber
hospitalis de Cusa trevirencis dioc. R<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>mi</hi> ...</q> <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Evan. 87 (Griesbach,
Bloomfield).
</p>

<p>
60. (Paul. 63, Apoc. 29.) Brit. Mus. Harl. 5613 [May, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1407,
Indict. 15], 8-½ × 5-¾, ff. 267 (26), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Apoc. xxii.
2-18. (Griesbach collated fifty-five chapters of Acts and Epp., Griesbach
and Scrivener's e in Apocalypse.)
</p>

<p>
*61. Brit. Mus. Add. 20,003 [April 20, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1044, Indict. 12], 7 × 6-½,
ff. 57 (23), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> in St. James. This has been called the most important
cursive copy of the Acts [but is much overrated&mdash;Ed.], was formerly
called 1o<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ti</hi> (p<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>), discovered by Tischendorf in Egypt in 1853, and sold to
the Trustees of the British Museum in 1854, was written by one John,
a monk, with rubrical marks added in a later hand. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> ch. iv. 8-vii.
17; xvii. 28-xxiii. 9; 297 verses. Independent collations have
been made by Tischendorf (Anecd. sacra et prof., pp. 7, 8, 130-46), by
Tregelles, and by Scrivener (Cod. Augiensis, Introd., pp. lxviii-lxx). Its
value is shown not so much by the readings in which it stands alone, as
<emph>by its agreement with the oldest uncial copies</emph>, where their testimonies
coincide. ((Paul. 61) comprised extracts made by Griesbach from the
margin of a copy of Mill's N. T. in the Bodleian (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 236), where
certain readings are cited under the notation <hi rend='italic'>Hal.</hi> These are now
known to be taken from Evan. 440, Act. 111, Paul. 221, or Scrivener's
v of the Gospels, o of the Acts and Epistles&mdash;Tischendorf, Tregelles.)
</p>

<p>
62. (Paul. 65.) Par. Nat. Gr. 60, once Colbert's [xiv], 14 × 9-1/8, ff. 135
(35), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, with scholia
(Wetstein, Griesbach, Scholz).
</p>

<p>
63. (Paul. 68.) Vindobon. Caesar, Nessel. 313 [xiv], 7-3/8 × 5-¾, ff. 157
(26), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, scholia (Treschow, Alter, Birch).
</p>

<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>

<p>
64. (Paul. 69.) Vind. Caes. Ness. 303 [xii], 7-3/8 × 5-¾, ff. 279 (22),
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, carefully written by one John,
brought by Ogier de Busbeck from Constantinople, like Cod. 67 and
many others of this collection (Treschow, Alter, Birch).
</p>

<p>
*65. (Evan. 218.)
</p>

<p>
66. (Paul. 67, Apoc. 34.) Vind. Caes. Ness. 302 [xii, Greg. xi],
7-¼ × 5-½, ff. 368 (22), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, scholia, and other matter: three several hands have made corrections,
which Griesbach regarded as far more valuable than the text
(cited by him 66**). <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Apoc. xv. 6-xvii. 3; xviii. 10-xix. 9;
xx. 8-xxii. 21. It once belonged to Arsenius Archbishop of Monembasia
(<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 333, Evst. 113), then to Sebastian Tengnagel and
Jo. Sambuc (A. C. Hwiid 1785 for the Acts, Treschow, Alter, Birch).
</p>

<p>
67. (Paul. 70.) Vind. Caes. Ness. 221 [written by one Leo at Constantinople,
December, 1331, Indict. 14], 8-¾ × 7, ff. 174 (31), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, elegant but inaccurate (Treschow, Alter,
Birch).
</p>

<p>
68. (Paul. 73.) Upsal. Univ. Gr. 1, 9 × 6-¾, ff. 220 (38), is in fact two
separate manuscripts bound together, both of high value. The first part
[xii] contains the Acts (commencing ch. viii. 14), Rom., 1 Cor. to ch. xv. 38:
the second [xi] begins 1 Cor. xiii. 6, and extends through the Pauline
and Catholic Epistles, which follow them. In the text of St. Paul it
much resembles Paul. 17. A catena is annexed, which is an abridgement
of Œcumenius, and the portion in duplicate (1 Cor. xiii. 6-xv. 38) has
contradictory readings (P. F. Aurivill [Orville?], 1786). It was bought
at Venice by Sparvenfeldt in 1678 (Belsheim).
</p>

<p>
69. (Paul. 74, Apoc. 30.) Guelpherbytanus xvi. 7, August., 8-7/8 × 6-1/8,
ff. 204 (29), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, also in two hands: the first (Acts and Epistles) [xiii],
written by George a monk, the Apocalypse [xiv]. It exhibits a remarkable
text, and has many marginal readings and <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> (Knittel, Matthaei).
</p>

<p>
All from 70 to 96 were slightly collated by Birch, and except 81,
93-6 by Scholz also.
</p>

<p>
70. (Evan. 131.)
</p>

<p>
71. (Evan. 133.)
</p>

<p>
72. (Paul. 79, Apoc. 37.) Rom. Vat. Gr. 366 [xiii, Greg. xv], 7-¾ × 5-3/8,
ff. 218 (24), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>
</p>

<p>
73. (Paul. 80.) Rom. Vat. Gr. 367 [xi], 8-1/8 × 6-3/8, ff. 165 (30), an
excellent manuscript used by Caryophilus (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 112).
</p>

<p>
74. Rom. Vat. Gr. 760 [xii], 10-1/8 × 8-¼, ff. 257 (24), contains only the
Acts with a catena.
</p>

<p>
75. (Evan. 141.)
</p>

<p>
76. (Evan. 142.)
</p>

<p>
77. (Evan. 149.)
</p>

<p>
78. (Paul. 89) Rom. Alexandrino-Vat. Gr. 29 [xii, Greg. x],
10 × 7-1/8, ff. 177 (21), a good copy, but <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> 2 Cor. xi. 15-xii. 1; Eph.
i. 9-Heb. xiii. 25. Traced to Strasburg in the possession of H. Boecler,
and identified with 201 (Scr., 3rd ed.) by Dr. Gregory.
</p>

<p>
79. (Paul. 90.) Rom. Urbino-Vat. Gr. 3 [xi], 7-3/8 × 5-½, ff. 161 (30).
</p>

<p>
80. (Paul. 91, Apoc. 42.) Rom. Pio-Vat. Gr. 50 [xii], 6-5/8 × 5-1/8, ff. 327 (21).
</p>

<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>

<p>
81. Rom. Barberin. Gr. vi. 21 [xi, Greg. xiv], 13-¾ × 10-¾, with a commentary
(Birch). Scholz could not find this copy, which has remarkable
readings: it contains but one chapter of the Acts and the Catholic
Epistles.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='manuscript-evan-180'/>
82. (Evan. 180.)
</p>

<p>
83. (Paul. 93.) Naples, Bibl. Nat. ii. Aa. 7 [x, Greg. xii], 10-3/8 × 7-3/8,
ff. 123 (37), 2 cols., written by Evagrius and compared with Pamphilus'
copy at Caesarea (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Act. 15): στίχοι sometimes in the margin. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi>
below, Act. 173.
</p>

<p>
84. (Paul. 94.) Florence, Laurent. iv. 1 [x], 12-¾ × 10-1/8, ff. 244 (21),
has St. Chrysostom's commentary on the Acts, that of Nicetas of Heraclea
on all the Epistles.
</p>

<p>
85. (Paul. 95.) Flor. Laurent. iv. 1 [xiii], 12-1/8 × 10, ff. 288 (31),
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, contains the Acts and <emph>Pauline</emph> Epistles with Theophylact's commentary.
</p>

<p>
86. (Paul. 96, Apoc. 75.) Flor. Laurent. iv. 30 [xi, Greg. x], 7-½ × 5-¾,
ff. 377 (18), with a commentary. Tregelles states that this is the same
copy as Cod. 147, the press-mark 20 being put by Birch in error
for 30.
</p>

<p>
87. (Paul. 97.) Flor. Laurent, iv. 29 [x], 10-¼ × 7-¾, ff. 294 (19), with
scholia, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, and a modern interlinear Latin version in the Epistles, for
the use of beginners.
</p>

<p>
88. (Paul. 98.) Flor. Laurent, iv. 31 [xi], 7 × 5-½, ff. 276 (24), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> in fine Titi.
</p>

<p>
89. (Paul. 99, Apoc. 45.), Flor. Laurent. iv. 32, 5 × 3-½, 276 (27),
written by John Tzutzuna, priest and monk, December, 1093, Indict. 1,
in the reign of Alexius Comnenus, Nicolas being Patriarch of Constantinople.
<hi rend='italic'>Prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, and a treatise of Dorotheus, Bishop of Tyre in
Julian's reign, on the seventy disciples and twelve Apostles, which is
found also in Act. 10, 179, Burdett-Coutts II. 4 (Paul. 266), in Erasmus'
N. T. (1516), and partly in Stephen's of 1550. See Cave's <q>Hist.
Lit.,</q> vol. i. pp. 164-172.
</p>

<p>
90. (Evan. 197.)
</p>

<p>
91. (Evan. 201.)
</p>

<p>
92. (Evan. 204.)
</p>

<p>
*93. (Evan. 205.)
</p>

<p>
*94. (Evan. 206.)
</p>

<p>
*95. (Evan. 209.)
</p>

<p>
*96. (Paul. 109.) Venet. Marc. 11 [xi, Greg. xiii or xiv], 11-¼ × 9-½,
ff. 304 (?), 3 cols., an important copy, often resembling Act. 142, from the
monastery of St. Michael de Troyna in Sicily. It has both a Latin and
an Arabic version. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Acts i. 1-12; xxv. 21-xxvi. 18; Philemon.
Act. 93-96 and Paul. 106-112 were collated by G. F. Rinck, <q>Lucubratio
Critica in Act. Apost. Epp. Cath. et Paul.</q> Basileae, 1830.
</p>

<p>
97. (Paul. 241.) Guelpherbyt. Biblioth. Gud. gr. 104. 2 [xii], 7-¼ × 5-3/8,
ff. 226 (27), once belonging to Langer, librarian at Wolfenbüttel, who
sent a collation to Griesbach. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Acts xvi. 39-xvii. 18: it has marginal
scholia from Chrysostom and Œcumenius, prayers and dialogues
subjoined. Deposited by one Theodoret in the Catechumens' library of
the Laura (monastery) of St. Athanasius on Athos.
</p>

<p>
Act. 98-107 were accurately collated by Matthaei for his N. T.
</p>

<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>

<p>
*98. (Paul. 113, Apost. 77.) Dresden, Reg. A. 104 [xi], 11-¾ × 8-5/8,
ff. 186 (40), 2 cols., once belonged to Jeremias the patriarch of
the monastery of Stauroniketa on Athos. Matthaei professes that he
chiefly followed this manuscript, which is divided into three parts: viz.
a<hi rend='vertical-align: sub'>1</hi> Church Lessons from the Acts, so arranged that no verse is lost, with
various readings and scholia in the margin: a<hi rend='vertical-align: sub'>2</hi> (or simply α) the text
with marginal various readings and scholia: a<hi rend='vertical-align: sub'>3</hi> Church Lessons from the
Acts and Epistles. Identified by Gregory with Act. 107.
</p>

<p>
*99. (Paul. 114.) Mosq. Synod. 5 (Mt. c) [April, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1445, Greg.
1345], folio, ff. 464, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, contains also the Life and Speeches of
Gregory Naz. and much other matter, from the Iberian or Iveron
monastery on Athos, carelessly written by Theognostus, Metropolitan of
Perga and Attalia: <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Euthal.</hi>, and some Patristic
writings.
</p>

<p>
*100. (Paul. 115.) Mosq. Synod. 334 (Mt. d) [xi], 4to, ff. ?, with
a catena and scholia.
</p>

<p>
*101. (Paul. 116.) Mosq. Synod. 333 (Mt. f) [xiii], 4to, ff. 240, <hi rend='italic'>chart.
B.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, carefully written, with scholia to the Acts.
</p>

<p>
*102. [This is Cod. K of the Catholic and Pauline Epistles, cited
according to Matthaei's notation. Hort's 102 is k<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>.]
</p>

<p>
*103. (Paul. 118.) Mosq. Synod. 193 (Mt. h) [xii], folio, ff. 236,
from the Iveron monastery on Athos, is a volume of scholia, with the
entire text in its margin for Acts i. 1-ix. 12; elsewhere only in fragments
after the usual manner of scholia.
</p>

<p>
*104. (Evan. 241.)
</p>

<p>
*105. (Evan. 242.)
</p>

<p>
*106. (Paul. 122.) Mosq. Synod. 328 (Mt. m) [xi], 4to, ff. 228, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, carefully written, from the Vatopedi monastery on
Athos, has <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, and the Psalms annexed.
</p>

<p>
107<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> under 98.</note>. (Paul. 491.) Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 22,734 [xi-xii], 11-5/8 × 9-¼,
ff. 248 (13-25), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. With comm. of Œcumenius. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi>
Acts iv. 15-22; xxiii. 15-30; Rom. v. 13-vi. 21; vi. 22-end of Phil.;
Col. iii. 15-iv. 11; Heb. xiii. 24-25 (pt.). Bears name of Jo. Card. de
Salviatis, and arms of Pius VI. Bought of Sp. P. Lampros of Athens
in 1853. (Greg. 204.)
</p>

<p>
108. (Evan. 226.)
</p>

<p>
109. (Evan. 228.)
</p>

<p>
Codd. 110-181 were first added to the list by Scholz, who states that
he collated entire 115, 133, 160; in the greater part 120-3, 126, 127,
131, 137, 161-3, 174; the rest slightly or not at all.
</p>

<p>
110. (Evan. 568.) (Greg. 247.)
</p>

<p>
Erase Evan. 441, being a printed edition (see p. 239). Hort's 110 is
a<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> which is our 182.
</p>

<p>
*111. (Evan. 440.) This is Scrivener's o Act. and Paul.
</p>

<p>
112. Cantabrig. 2068 erase: it is the same as Cod. 9. Hort's 112 is
c<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>, which is our 184. Instead of it Greg. inserts&mdash;
</p>

<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>

<p>
(Paul. 179.) Modena, Este ii. G. 3 [ix or x], 13 × 8-7/8, ff. ? (30), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Euthal.</hi>, being part of uncial H in minuscules (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> under H of Acts).
</p>

<p>
*113. (Evan. 18.)
</p>

<p>
Codd. 113, 114, 117, being 132, 134, 137 of St. Paul respectively,
together with Act. 127 and Paul. 139, 140, 153, have been collated by
J. G. Reiche, in his <q>Codicum aliquot Graecorum N. T. Parisiensium
nova descriptio: praemissis quibusdam de neglecti MSS. N. T. studii
causâ.</q> Gott. 1847.
</p>

<p>
*114. (Paul. 134.) Par. Nat. Gr. 57 [xiii, Greg. xi], 11-5/8 x 8-¾, ff. 231
(24), 2 cols., κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, &amp;c., a valuable copy, with some portions of
the Septuagint version, and prayers for the service of the Greek Church.
</p>

<p>
115. (Paul. 135.) Par. Nat. Gr. 58, once Colbert's (as were 118, 121,
122, 124, 128, 129) [xiii, Greg. xi], 10-1/8 × 7-¾, ff. 174 (28), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., begins Acts xiv. 27, ends 2 Tim.; no liturgical notes.
</p>

<p>
116. (Paul. 136, Apoc. 53.) Par. Nat. Gr. 59, once Teller's [xvi],
11 × 8, ff. 331 (21), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, and scholia to the Catholic Epistles.
</p>

<p>
*117. (Evan. 263, Paul. 137) of some value.
</p>

<p>
118. (Paul. 138, Apoc. 55.) Par. Nat. Gr. 101 [xiii], 9-1/8 × 6-¼, ff. 200
(28), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Acts xix. 18-xxii. 17.
</p>

<p>
119. (Paul. 139, Apoc. 56.) Par. Nat. Gr. 102 A [x, but Apoc. xiii],
9-¼ × 6-¾, ff. 229 (26, 25), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> 2 Cor.
i. 8-ii. 4. Cath. follow Paul., as in Cod. 120.
</p>

<p>
120. (Paul. 141.) Par. Nat. Gr. 103 A [xi, Greg. xiii], 9-5/8 x 6-5/8,
ff. 243 (22), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> beginning Acts xxi. 20
(v. 38-vi. 7; vii. 6-16; 32-x. 25 <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, [xiii]). <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Acts xxviii. 23-Rom.
ii. 26; Phil. i. 5-1 Thess. iv. 1; v. 26-2 Thess. i. 11; 1 John
ii. 11-iii. 3; 24-v. 14; 2 John; ending 3 John 11.
</p>

<p>
121. (Paul. 142.) Par. Nat. Gr. 104 [xiii], 7-¼ × 5, ff. 257 (24), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, August. de Thou's, then Colbert's.
</p>

<p>
122. (Paul. 143.) Par. Nat. Gr. 105 [xi or x], 8-1/8 × 6-¼, ff. 248 (17),
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., correctly written, but fragments, viz.
Acts xiii. 48-xv. 22; 29-xvi. 36; xvii. 4-xviii. 26; xx. 16-xxviii.
17; 1 Pet. ii. 20-iii. 2; 1 John iii. 5; 21-v. 9; 2 John 8-3 John 10;
Jude 7-Rom. iv. 16; 24-vii. 9; 18-1 Cor. i. 28; ii. 13-viii. 1;
ix. 6-xiv. 2; 10-Gal. i. 10; ii. 4-Eph. i. 18; 1 Tim. i. 14-v. 5.
</p>

<p>
123. (Paul. 144.) Par. Nat. Gr. 106 A [xiv], 8-5/8 × 6-1/8, ff. 276 (29),
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. Hymns. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> 1 Pet. i. 9-ii.
7.
</p>

<p>
124. (Paul. 149, Apoc. 57.) Par. Nat. Gr. 124 [xvi], 16mo, beautifully
written by Angelus Vergecius.
</p>

<p>
125. (Paul. 150.) Par. Nat. Gr. 125 [xiv], 6-5/8 × 7-7/8, ff. 394 (16), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, ἀναγν., στίχ., from Constantinople.
</p>

<p>
126. (Paul. 153.) Par. Nat. Gr. 216, from Medici collection [x],
12-¾ × 9-½, ff. 333 (21), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ.,
probably written at Constantinople, with catena, sometimes in uncial,
occasionally, esp. in Heb., as late as [xvi].
</p>

<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>

<p>
*127. (Paul. 154.) Par. Nat. Gr. 217 [xi], 12-5/8 × 10-1/8, ff. 373 (28-33),
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., carelessly written (Vansittart), collated by
Reiche. It has a catena. Act., scholia (Cath.), Theodoret's commentary
(Paul.).
</p>

<p>
128. (Paul. 155.) Par. Nat. Gr. 218 [xi], 12-½ x 10, ff. 317 (37), with
a catena.
</p>

<p>
129. (Paul. 156.) Par. Nat. Gr. 220 [xiii, Greg. xiv], 11-½ × 8-½, ff. 388
(41), 2 cols., a commentary, the text sometimes suppressed.
</p>

<p>
130. Par. Nat. Gr. 221 [xii], 11-1/8 × 8-½, ff. 177 (14), from the East,
with a catena. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Acts xx. 38-xxii. 3; 2 Pet. i. 14-iii. 18; 1 John
iv. 11-Jude 8.
</p>

<p>
131. (Paul. 158.) Par. Nat. Gr. 223, once Boistaller's, contains Paul.
with <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> and catena, [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1045], 11-½ × 8-½, ff. 273 (23), by Theopemptus,
a reader, followed by Act. and Cath. [xii].
</p>

<p>
132. (Evan. 330.)
</p>

<p>
133. (Paul. 166.) Turin, Univ. C. vi. 19 [xiii, Greg. xii], 8 × 5-¾, ff. 295
(24), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, in a clear large hand; Dr. Hort noticed remarkable
readings in the Catholic Epistles. The Epistle to the Hebrews precedes
1 Timothy, as Pasinus notes in his Catalogue.
</p>

<p>
134. (Paul. 167.) Turin, Univ. B. v. 19 [xi, Greg. xii or xiii], 8-¼ × 6,
ff. 370 (19), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> Acts i, ii. Pasinus notes that the Pauline precede
the Catholic Epistles.
</p>

<p>
135. (Evan. 339.)
</p>

<p>
136. (Paul. 169.) Turin, Univ. C. v. 1 [xii], 9-¼ × 7, ff. 174 (27),
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> in Heb.
</p>

<p>
137. (Paul. 176.) Milan, Ambros. E. 97 sup. [xi, Greg. xiii], 10-1/8 × 7-3/8,
ff. 276 (23), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., bought at Corfu: so like
Codd. DEc<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> (Act. 184) and the margin of the Harkleian Syriac in the
Acts, as to assist us when DE are mutilated, especially in additions:
e.g. Acts xxvii. 5; xxviii. 16; 19 (<hi rend='italic'>bis</hi>). <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Scrivener's <q>Cod. Bezae,</q>
Introd., p. lix, note.
</p>

<p>
138. (Paul. 173.) Milan, Ambros. E. 102 sup. [xiv, Greg. xv], 9-¾ × 6-¾,
ff. 202 (19), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, once J. V. Pinelli's; it contains the Epistles only.
</p>

<p>
139. (Paul. 174.) Milan, Ambros. H. 104 sup. [written March 20,
1434, Indict. 12, by one Athanasius], 11-½ × 8-5/8, ff. 164 (31), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, bought at Padua, 1603.
</p>

<p>
140. (Paul. 215, Apoc. 74.) Venice, 546 [partly xi on vellum, partly
xiii <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>], 11-½ × 9-5/8, ff. 268 (21), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, στίχ. The Epistles have a catena,
the Apocalypse a commentary.
</p>

<p>
141. (Evan. 189.)
</p>

<p>
142. (Paul. 178.) Modena, iii. B. 17 [xii], 7-1/8 × 5-3/8, ff. ?, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>,
στίχ., valuable, but with many errors; see however Act. 96.
</p>

<p>
143. (Evan. 832.) Contains the Catholic Epistles, but not the Acts.
</p>

<p>
144. (Evan. 363.)
</p>

<p>
145. (Evan. 365.)
</p>

<p>
146. (Evan. 367.)
</p>

<p>
147. Ven. St. Mark ii. 61.
</p>

<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>

<p>
148. (Paul. 184.) Flor. Laurent. Convent. Soppr. 191 [written
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 984, Indict. 12, by Theophylact, priest and doctor of law], 13-½ × 9-½,
ff. 342, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, once belonged to the Benedictine Library of St. Mary.
</p>

<p>
149. (Paul. 349, Apoc. 180.) Flor. Laurent. Conv. Soppr. 150 [xiii,
Greg. xii], 8-*/8 × 5-¼, ff. 144 (32), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., contains the Catholic
Epistles, with a Latin version.
</p>

<p>
150. (Evan. 368.)
</p>

<p>
151. (Evan. 386.)
</p>

<p>
152. (Evan. 1202.)
</p>

<p>
153. (Evan. 444.)
</p>

<p>
154. (Paul. 187.) Rom. Vat. Gr. 1270 [xv, Greg. xiv], 8-¾ × 6-½, ff. 164
(36), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, contains the Acts, Catholic Epistles, Rom., 1 Cor.,
with a commentary.
</p>

<p>
155. (Paul. 188.) Rom. Vat. Gr. 1430 [xii], 14 × 11-¼, ff. 270 (20),
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, with a commentary in another hand. It does not contain the Acts,
but all the Epistles.
</p>

<p>
156. (Paul. 190.) Rom. Vat. Gr. 1650 [Jan. 1037], 13-½ × 10-¾, ff. 187
(43), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Euthal.</hi>,
written for Nicolas Archbishop of Calabria by the cleric Theodore. The
Pauline Epistles have a commentary: it begins Acts v. 4.
</p>

<p>
157. (Paul. 191.) Rom. Vat. Gr. 1714 [xii], 8-½ × 6-¾, ff. 46 (25), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., is a heap of disarranged fragments,
containing Acts xviii. 14-xix. 9; xxiv. 11-xxvi. 23; James
iii. 1-v. 20; 3 John with κεφ. and ὑπόθεσις to Jude; Rom. vi. 22-viii.
32; xi. 31-xv. 23; 1 Cor. i. 1-iii. 12.
</p>

<p>
158. (Paul. 192.) Rom. Vat. Gr. 1761 [xi], 9-½ × 7-1/8, ff. 481 (21),
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ. From this copy Mai supplied the lacunae of
Cod. B in the Pauline Epistles.
</p>

<p>
159. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1968, Basil. 7 [xi, Greg. x], 6-¼ × 4-1/8, ff. 84 (22), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, contains the Acts, James, and 1 Peter,
with scholia, whose authors' names are given. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Acts i. 1-v. 29;
vi. 14-vii. 11.
</p>

<p>
160. (Paul. 193, Apoc. 24.) Rom. Vat. Gr. 2062 [xi, Greg. x],
10-5/8 × 8, ff. 287 (26), κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., with copious scholia accompanied
by the authors' names: it begins Acts xxviii. 19, ends Heb. ii. 1.
</p>

<p>
161. (Paul. 198, Apoc. 69.) Rom. Vat. Ottob. Gr. 258 [xiii, Greg.
xiv], 9-¾ × 7-3/8, ff. 216 (32), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, with a Latin
version: it begins Acts ii. 27, and the last chapters of the Apocalypse are
lost. The latter part was written later [xiv].
</p>

<p>
162. (Paul. 200.) Rom. Vat. Ottob. Gr. 298 [xv, Greg. xiv], 6-¾ × 4-¾,
ff. 265 (27), 2 cols., with the Latin Vulgate version (with which Scholz
states that the Greek has been in many places made to harmonize) in
a parallel column, contains many transpositions of words, and unusual
readings introduced by a later hand<note place='foot'>Cod. 162 has attracted much attention from the circumstance that it is the
only unsuspected witness among the Greek manuscripts for the celebrated text
1 John v. 7, 8, whose authenticity will be discussed in Vol. II. Ch. XII. A facsimile
of the passage in question was traced in 1829 by Cardinal Wiseman for
Bishop Burgess, and published by Horne in several editions of his <q>Introduction,</q>
as also by Tregelles (Horne, vol. iv. p. 217). If the facsimile is at all faithful, this
is as rudely and indistinctly written as any manuscript in existence; but the
illegible scrawl between the Latin column in the post of honour on the left, and
the Greek column on the right, has been ascertained by Mr. B. H. Alford (who
examined the codex at Tregelles' request) to be merely a consequence of the
accidental shifting of the tracing paper, too servilely copied by the engraver.</note>.
</p>

<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>

<p>
163. (Paul. 201.) Rom. Vat. Ottob. Gr. 325 [xiv], 7-5/8 × 4-7/8, ff. 215
(26) <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Acts iv. 19-v. 1.
</p>

<p>
164. (Evan. 390.)
</p>

<p>
165. Rom. Vat. Ottob. Gr. 417 [xiv, Greg. xvi], 8-3/8 × 5-¾, ff. 339 (21),
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, contains the Catholic Epistles, with works of St. Ephraem and
others.
</p>

<p>
166. (Paul. 204, Apoc. 22.) Rom. Vallicell. B. 86 [xii-xiv, Greg.],
7 × 4-7/8, ff. 258 (26), i.e. ff. 1-103 [xii], by George, son of Elias; 104-191
[xiii], by Joachim, a monk; 192-228 [xii] also by George; 229-254
[xiv]; and four prefatory leaves, chart., were added later [xvi]. <hi rend='italic'>Prol.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. Described with facsimile in Bianchini, Evan.
Quadr., vol. ii. pt. 1, pp. 535-8.
</p>

<p>
167. (Evan. 393.)
</p>

<p>
168. (Paul. 205.) Rom. Vallicell. F. 13 [xiv], 9-¼ × 6-3/8, ff. 204 (40),
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ.
</p>

<p>
169. (Paul. 206.) Rom. Ghigian. R. v. 29 [June 12, 1394<note place='foot'>Scholz says 1344, and Tischendorf corrects but few of his gross errors in
these Catalogues: but <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.m.</hi> 6902, which he cites from the manuscript, is <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1394.</note>], 11-½ × 8-½,
ff. 248 (21), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., written by
Joasaph at Constantinople in the monastery τῶν ὁδηγῶν. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Evangelistarium
86.
</p>

<p>
170. (Evan. 394.)
</p>

<p>
171. 172 (Paul. 209, 210) are both Collegii Romani [xvi], fol., <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
Dr. Gregory could not find them in 1886.
</p>

<p>
173. (Paul. 211.) Naples, Nat. Libr. ii. Aa. 8 [xi], 8-¾ × 6-5/8, ff. 245
(22), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., and μαρτυρίαι
cited from Scripture and profane writers. This codex has 1 John v.
7, 8 in the margin, by a recent hand. Tregelles suggests that this is
probably the same copy as Cod. 83, the readings ascribed to it being
extracted from the margin of that manuscript.
</p>

<p>
174. (Paul. 212.) Naples, Nat. Libr. ii. Aa. 9 [xv], 8-½ × 5-5/8, ff. 208
(27), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ.
</p>

<p>
175. (Paul. 216.) Messina, St. Basil 104 [xii], 11-5/8 × 8-7/8, ff. 241 (25),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>
</p>

<p>
176. (Evan. 421.)
</p>

<p>
177. (Evan. 122.)
</p>

<p>
178. (Paul. 242, Apoc. 87 or m<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>.) Cheltenham, Phillipps 1461 [xi or
xii, Greg. xiv and xv], 9-½ × 6-½, ff. 229 (27), (Hoskier), bought at
Meerman's sale in 1824 by the late Sir T. Phillipps, Bart., of Middle
Hill, Worcestershire. The Pauline Epistles are written smaller than
the rest, but in the same clear hand. <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. (but not
in the Apocalypse), flourished rubric capitals. Scrivener in 1856 fully
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
collated Apoc. (whose text is valuable), the rest slightly. It is sadly
mutilated; it begins Acts iv. 24; <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> Acts v. 2-16; vi. 2-vii. 2;
16-viii. 10; 38-ix. 13; 26-39; x. 9-22; 43-xiii. 1; xxiii.
32-xxiv. 24; xxviii. 23-James i. 5; iii. 6-iv. 16; 2 Pet. iii.
10-1 John i. 1; iii. 13-iv. 2; Jude 16-25; Rom. xiv. 23 (xvi.
25-27 was there placed)-xv. 14; 1 Cor. iii. 15-xv. 23; 2 Cor. x.
14-xi. 19; xiii. 5-13; Eph. i. 1-ii. 14; v. 29-vi. 24; Col. i.
24-26; ii. 4-7; 2 Thess. i. 1-iii. 5; Heb. ix. 3-x. 29; Apoc. xiv.
4-14: ending Apoc. xxi. 12. The ὑποθέσεις and tables of κεφ. before
each Epistle have suffered in like manner.
</p>

<p>
179. (Paul. 128, Apoc. 82.) Munich, Royal Libr. 211 [xi, Delitzsch
xiii], 10-5/8 × 8-3/8, ff. 227 (25), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, ὑπογραφαί, Dorotheus' treatise (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi>
Act. 89), fragments of <hi rend='italic'>Eus. t.</hi>, and (in a later hand) marginal scholia to
St. Paul. Belonged to Zomozerab, the Bohemian. The text is very near
that commonly received. The portion of this manuscript which contains
the Apocalypse is described by Delitzsch, Handschriftliche Funde,
Leipzig, 1862, pp. 45-48, with a facsimile of Apoc. viii. 12, 13.
</p>

<p>
180. (Evan. 431.) Important, but seems to have perished in 1870 at
Strasburg.
</p>

<p>
181. (Evan. 400<note place='foot'><p>Here again we banish to the notes Scholz's list from Cod. 182 to Cod. 189,
for the reasons stated after Evan. 449.
</p>
<p>
182. (Paul. 243.) Library of St. John's monastery at Patmos [xii], 8vo, also
another [xiii] 8vo.
</p>
<p>
183. (Paul. 231.) Library of the Great Greek monastery at Jerusalem 8 [xiv],
8vo. This must be Coxe's No. 7 [x], 4to, beginning Acts xii. 6.
</p>
<p>
184. (Paul. 232, Apoc. 85.) Jerusalem 9 [xiii], 4to, with a commentary. This
is evidently Coxe's No. 15, though he dates it at the end of [x].
</p>
<p>
185. (Paul. 233.) St. Saba, Greek monastery, 1 [xi], 12mo.
</p>
<p>
186. (Evan. 457.)
</p>
<p>
187. (Evan. 462.)
</p>
<p>
188. (Paul. 236.) St. Saba 15 [xii], 4to.
</p>
<p>
189. (Evan. 466.)</p></note>.)
</p>

<p>
The following codices also are described by Scrivener, Cod. Augiens.,
Introd. pp. lv-lxiv, and their collations given in the Appendix.
</p>

<p>
*182. a<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> (Paul. 252). Lond. Lambeth 1182 [xii, Greg. xiii], 10-½ × 6-7/8,
ff. 397 (20), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, brought (as were also 183-6) by Carlyle from
a Greek island. A later hand [xiv] supplied Acts i. 1-xii. 3; xiii.
5-15; 2, 3 John, Jude. In this copy and 183 the Pauline Epistles
precede the Catholic. <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, ἀποδημίαι
παύλου, ἀντίφωνα for Easter, and other foreign matter. The various
readings are interesting, and strongly resemble those of Cod. 69 of
the Acts, and Cod. 61 hardly less, especially in Acts xiii-xvii. This is
Hort's Cod. 110. (Greg. 214.)
</p>

<p>
*183. b<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> (Paul. 253). Lond. Lamb. 1183 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1358], 10 × 7, ff. 236
(27), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> 1 Cor. xi. 7-27; 1 Tim. iv. 1-v. 8. <hi rend='italic'>Syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, in a beautiful hand, with many later corrections.
(Greg. 215.)
</p>

<p>
*184. c<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> (Paul. 254). Lond. Lamb. 1184 [xv], 4to, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> Acts
vii. 52-viii. 25. Having been restored in 1817 (Evan. 516), its
readings (which, especially in the Acts and Catholic Epistles, are very
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>
important) are taken from an excellent collation (Lamb. 1255, 10-14)
made for Carlyle about 1804 by the Rev. W. Sanderson of Morpeth.
The text much resembles that of Act. 61, and is almost identical with
that of B.-C. III. 37 (Act. 221) and of Act. 137. This is Hort's Cod.
112. (Greg. 216.)
</p>

<p>
*185. d<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> (Paul. 255). Lond. Lamb. 1185 [xiv ?], 8-¾ × 5-¾, ff. 209
(23-5), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, miserably
mutilated and ill-written. It must be regarded as a collection of
fragments in at least four different hands, pieced together by the most
recent scribe. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Acts ii. 36-iii. 8; vii. 3-59; xii. 7-25; xiv.
8-27; xviii. 20-xix. 12; xxii. 7-xxiii. 11; 1 Cor. viii. 12-ix. 18;
2 Cor. i. 1-10; Eph. iii. 2-Phil. i. 24; 2 Tim. iv. 12-Tit. i. 6; Heb.
vii. 19-ix. 12. We have 1 Cor. v. 11, 12; 2 Cor. x. 8-15, written by
two different persons. (Greg. 217.)
</p>

<p>
*186. e<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> (Paul. 321) seems to have been Lond. Lamb. 1181 [xiv],
4to of the Acts, Catholic and Pauline Epistles as we learn from the
Lambeth Catalogue, but having been returned (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 516), we have
access only to a tolerable collation of Acts i. 1-xxvii. 12, made by the
Rev. John Fenton for Carlyle (Lamb. 1255, 27-33). In its text it
much resembles Cod. E. (Greg. 218.)
</p>

<p>
*187. f<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> (Evan. 543). (Greg. 194.)
</p>

<p>
*188. g<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> (Evan. 542). (Greg. 193.)
</p>

<p>
189. (Evan. 825.) (Greg. 258.)
</p>

<p>
190. (Evan. 503.)
</p>

<p>
191. (Paul. 245.) Oxf. Ch. Ch. Wake 38 [xi], 7 × 5-½, ff. 306 (23),
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Euthal.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, in small and neat
characters, from St. Saba (brought to England with the other Wake
manuscripts in 1731), contains a catena, and at the end the date 1312
(ἐτελειώθη τὸ παρὸν ἐν ἔτει ϛωκ᾽) in a later hand. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Acts i. 1-11.
</p>

<p>
192. (Paul. 246.) Oxf. Ch. Ch. Wake 37 [xi], 8 × 6, ff. 237 (23), κεφ.,
<hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Acts xii. 4-xxiii. 32. The last leaf is a palimpsest, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
at end about 1490 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, the vellum being about 1070, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> 6 leaves at
beginning and 16-24.
</p>

<p>
*193. (Evan. 492.) (Greg. 199.)
</p>

<p>
194. (Evan. 451.) (Greg. 206.)
</p>

<p>
195. Modena, Este ii. A. 13 [xiii, Greg. xv], 4 × 3-¼, ff. ?, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 238.)
</p>

<p>
196. Modena, Este ii. C. 4 [xi or xii], 9-5/8 × 8, ff. ? <hi rend='italic'>Prol.</hi> ἀποδημία
and μαρτ. Paul., κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> (See Greg. 239.)
</p>

<p>
197. (Evan. 461.) (Greg. 207.)
</p>

<p>
198. (Paul. 280.) Cheltenham, Phillipps 7681 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1107], 12-¼ × 8-7/8,
ff. 268 (24), 2 cols., is a copy of the Acts and all the Epistles from the
Hon. F. North's collection. A grand folio in a very large hand (Hoskier).
(Greg. 225.)
</p>

<p>
199. Cheltenham, Phillipps 7682 (Evan. 531). (Greg. 255.)
</p>

<p>
200. Cheltenham, Phillipps 1284 (Evan. 527). (Greg. 254.)
</p>

<p>
201. (Paul. 396, Apoc. 86.) Athens, National Library (490, 217) [xiv,
Greg. xv], 10-5/8 × 6-¾, ff. 453 (42), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>
beginning and end, with commentary of Theophylact, and Andreas
(alone) on Apocalypse. (Greg. 251. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Act. 78.)
</p>

<p>
Besides Evann. 226 and 228, entered above as Act. 108 and 109,
Montana sent to Mr. Kelly a list of eight more in the Escurial (Greg.
230-237, who inserts Σ. i. 5 for 206).
</p>

<p>
202. Escurial ρ. iii. 4 [xiii].
</p>

<p>
203. Escurial τ. iii. 12 [xiii].
</p>

<p>
204. Escurial χ. iii. 3 [xii].
</p>

<p>
205. Escurial χ. iii. 10 [xii].
</p>

<p>
206. Escurial χ. iv. 2 [xiv].
</p>

<p>
207. Escurial ψ. iii. 6 [xi].
</p>

<p>
208. Escurial ψ. iii. 18 [x].
</p>

<p>
209. Escurial ω. iv. 22 [xv].
</p>

<p>
210. (Paul. 247.) Paris, St. Geneviève, A. O. 35 [xiv, Greg. xv],
7 × 4-¾, ff. 132 (24), beautifully written and illuminated, contains the
Catholic and Pauline Epistles. Some name like Λασκαρις stands on
fol. 1 in silver letters enclosed by a laurel-leaf. Described to Burgon
by the librarian, M. Ruelle. (Greg. 415.)
</p>

<p>
The next three are at Oxford:
</p>

<p>
211. (Evan. 488.) (Greg. 200.)
</p>

<p>
212. (Paul. 250.) Oxf. Bodl. Canon. Gr. 110 [x], 7-½ × 5-¼, ff. 380 (18),
<hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> (Euthal.), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. (Paul.), a beautiful
copy of the Acts and all the Epistles. For its collation, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 105.
It also contains one leaf from Cyril's Homilies, and two other later.
(Greg. 221.)
</p>

<p>
213. (Paul. 251.) Oxf. Bodl. Misc. Gr. 118 [xiii], 9 × 6-½, ff. 149 (29),
<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Euthal.</hi> (Paul.), κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi>, also
contains the Acts and all the Epistles. (Greg. 222.)
</p>

<p>
214. (Evan. 846.) (Greg. 258.)
</p>

<p>
215. Parham 6 (Evan. 534). (Greg. 202.)
</p>

<p>
216. (Paul. 234.) Parham 79. 14 [1009], 10-¼ × 8, ff. ?, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ.,
from St. Saba; a facsimile in Parham Catalogue. This copy and the
next two contain the Acts and all the Epistles. (Greg. 226.)
</p>

<p>
217. (Paul. 235.) Parham 80. 15 [xi, Greg. xii], 10-5/8 × 8-½, ff. ?, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., from Caracalla, with a marginal commentary. (Greg. 227.)
</p>

<p>
218. (Paul. 236.) Parham 81. 16 [xiii], 13-½ × 8-5/8, ff. ?, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, from Simopetra on Athos. (Greg. 228.)
</p>

<p>
The Baroness Burdett-Coutts has three copies of the Acts, two of the
Catholic Epistles, viz.:
</p>

<p>
*219. B.-C. II. 7 (Evan. 549). (Greg. 201.)
</p>

<p>
*220. (Paul. 264.) B.-C. III. 1, Acts and all the Epistles, the Pauline
preceding the Catholic [xi or xii], 11-½ × 8, ff. 375 (22), on fine vellum,
with broad margins. This is one of the most superb copies extant of
the latter part of the N. T., on which so much cost was seldom bestowed
as on the Gospels. The illuminations before each book, the golden
titles, subscriptions, and capitals, are very rich and fresh: the rubrical
directions are in bright red at the top and bottom of the pages. The
preliminary matter consists of <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> of the Apostolos, ὑπόθεσις to the
<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>
Acts, Εὐθαλίου διακόνου περὶ τῶν χρόνων τοῦ κηρύγματος τοῦ ἁγίου παύλου, κεφ.
<hi rend='italic'>t.</hi> of the Acts, in all twenty pages. There are no other tables of κεφάλαια,
but their τίτλοι and κεφ. are given throughout the manuscript. To
each Epistle is prefixed the ordinary ὑπόθεσις or <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, and to eight
of them Theodoret's also. Three leaves at the beginning of Epistles
(containing portions of <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> and 2 Cor. i. 1-3; Eph. i. 1-4; Heb. i.
1-6) have been shamefully cut out for the sake of the illuminations.
A complete menology of eighteen pages closes the volume. At the end
of Jude we find in golden letters <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>κε</hi> <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>ἰυ</hi> <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>χε</hi> υἱὲ τοῦ θὺ ἐλέησόν με τὸν πολϊαμάρτητον
ἀντώνϊον τάχα καὶ μοναχὸν τὸν μαλεύκην.  (Greg. 223.)
</p>

<p>
*221. (Paul. 265.) B.-C. III. 37 [xii], 6 × 4, 270 (20) + 6 <hi rend='italic'>membran.</hi>
[xiv or later], and <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> [xv] (beginning and end), <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>,
contains the Acts, Catholic and Pauline Epistles complete. This copy
is full of instructive variations, being nearest akin to the Harkleian
Syriac <foreign rend='italic'>cum asterisco</foreign> and to c<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> (184), then to a<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> (182), 137, 100, 66<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>**</hi>,
69, d<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> (185) next to 27, 29, 57<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>**</hi>. (Greg. 224.)
</p>

<p>
222. (Evan. 560.) (Greg. 257.)
</p>

<p>
*223. (Paul. 262.) Brit. Mus. Egerton 2787 [xiv], 7-¾ × 5-3/8, ff. 244 (22),
mut. Jude 20-25, containing the Acts and all the Epistles, neatly written
and bound in the original oak boards. After being offered for £60 in
London from 1869 to 1875, it was bought by Dean Burgon, and, like
Evan. 563, passed to his nephew, the Rev. W. F. Rose, and was obtained
for the Museum in 1893. <hi rend='italic'>Prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., ἀρχ. and τέλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>,
στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, at the beginning, but it has been ill used, and the text
corrected by an unskilful hand. Its faded ornaments were executed in
lake. (Greg. 229.)
</p>

<p>
*224. (Evan. 507) w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. Hort's Act. 102. (Greg. 195.)
</p>

<p>
Besides the British Museum copies already described (Act. 22, 25-8,
59, 91) we must add:
</p>

<p>
*225 or j<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. Lond. Brit. Mus. Burney 48 [xiv], 14-¾ × 10-¼, end of
St. Chrysost. vol. ii, ff. (230-244) 15, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, Κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>,
τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., elegantly written, contains the Catholic Epistles
(except that of St. Jude), with important variations. (Greg. 219.)
</p>

<p>
226. (Evan. 576.) (Greg. 196.)
</p>

<p>
227. (Evan. 582.) (Greg. 197.)
</p>

<p>
228. (Evan. 584.) (Greg. 198.)
</p>

<p>
229. (Paul. 270.) Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 19,388 [xiii or xiv], 7-¼ × 5-¾,
ff. 94 (21), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, very neat, bought of Simonides
in 1853, contains only 2 Cor. xi. 25-1 Pet. iii. 15, for which order <hi rend='italic'>see</hi>
Vol. I. p. 73. (Greg. 220.)
</p>

<p>
Act. 226-229 were also examined by Dr. Bloomfield.
</p>

<p>
230. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 19,392 [xi], ff. 14 × 10-½, ff. (2 + 1 + 2 =) 5,
(1) two leaves of wonderful beauty, containing James i. 1-23, the
heading illuminated, κεφ. at the tops of the pages, with a commentary
on three sides of the text in a very minute hand; (2) one leaf of an
Evst. out of a volume which fell into the hands of General Menon, and
was presented by Mr. Harris of Alexandria to the Brit. Mus., containing
<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>
Matt. vi. 13-18 (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evst. 262); (3) two leaves containing Luke
xxiv. 25-35; John i. 35-51. (Greg. 203.)
</p>

<p>
231. (Evan. 603.) (Greg. 256.)
</p>

<p>
232. (Paul. 271, Apoc. 107.) Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 28,816 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1111, Indict. 4], 11-½ × 8-½, ff. 149 (32), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> (no τίτλ.),
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, μαρτ., στίχ., a splendid copy, bought (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 603) of Sir Ivor
Guest in 1871. A facsimile is exhibited in the Palaeographical Society's
work, Plate 84. It begins with Euthalii ἔκθεσις of the chapters of the
Acts. Euthalius' Prologue also precedes the Pauline Epistles, and that
of Arethas (σύνοψις σχολική) the Apocalypse, with a table of his seventy-two
κεφάλαια. Throughout the volume the numerals indicating the κεφάλαια
of each book stand in the margin in red, and a list of the κεφ. before
each. There are many marginal glosses in a very minute hand. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi>
1 Cor. xvi. 15&mdash;Prol. to 2 Cor., and one leaf (Eph. v. 3-vi. 16) is
supplied [xv] <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> There are ten leaves at the end containing foreign
matter, by the same hand, and in the colophon, besides the date, we
read that the monk Andreas wrote it εἰς τὸ ὄρος τοῦ <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>πρσ</hi> καὶ α<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>γ</hi> μελετίου
τῆς μυοπόλεως ἐν τῇ μονῇ τοῦ <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>σρσ</hi>, adding of himself (as well he might)
πολλὰ γὰρ ἐκοπίασα ἐν τρισὶν ἔτεσιν κτίζων αὐτήν.  The foreign matter
includes an exposition of the errors condemned by the seven general
councils (ff. 143-5), resembling that in Evan. 69. (Greg. 205.)
</p>

<p>
233. (Evan. 605.) (Greg. 253.)
</p>

<p>
234. (Evan. 608.) (Greg. 417.)
</p>

<p>
235. (Evan. 472.)
</p>

<p>
Belsheim enables us to add
</p>

<p>
236. (Paul. 273, Apoc. 108.) Upsal, Univ. Gr. 11 [xii], 6-½ × 4-¾,
ff. 182 (33), containing the Acts, Epistles, and Apocalypse. (Greg. 335.)
</p>

<p>
237. (Evan. 616, Paul. 274.) (Greg. 269.)
</p>

<p>
He also found
</p>

<p>
238. Linköping, Benzel 35, once belonging to Eric Benzel [1675-1743],
Archbishop of Upsal [x], 4to, ff. 244, very beautiful, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> at beginning
and end, contains the Acts and all the Epistles (Paul. 272), the Epistle
to the Hebrews preceding 1 Tim. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> 2 Thess. iii. 7-Heb. i. 5.
(Greg. 334.)
</p>

<p>
239. Rom. Vat. Gr. 652 [xiv], 11 × 7-½, ff. 105, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, the Acts only
for all that appears, with Theophylact's commentary, as printed in full
in vol. iii (pp. 189-317, Praef. p. viii) of the Venice edition of
Theophylact, 1758. <hi rend='italic'>Lect.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλοι, ἀρχ. and τέλη (Burgon). (Greg.
325.)
</p>

<p>
Fourteen copies were seen by Mr. Coxe in the East, which are
numbered below. Compare Scholz's list.
</p>

<p>
240. (Paul. 282, Apoc. 109.) Paris Nat. <q>Arménien 9</q> [xi], 11-½ × 9,
ff. 323 (36), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. Greek and Armenian.
(Greg. 301.)
</p>

<p>
241. (Paul. 283.) Messina, Univ. 40 [xii, Greg. xiii], 13-3/8 × 10-¼, ff. 224
(28), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> Begins at Acts viii. 2, ends at Hebrews viii. 2.
Has a commentary. (Greg. 320.)
</p>

<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>

<p>
242. (Evan. 622, Paul. 290, Apoc. 110.) Crypta Ferrata Α᾽, α᾽. 1.
(Greg. 267.)
</p>

<p>
243. (Paul. 291.) Crypta Ferrata Α. β. 1 [x], 9 × 7-1/8, ff. 139 (25),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Euth.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. John (1, 2, 3),
Jude, Paul. (Heb., Tim.). <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> 2 Tim. iv. 8-end. (Greg. 317.)
</p>

<p>
244. (Paul. 292.) Crypta Ferrata Α. β. 3 [xi or xii], 10-¼ × 6-¾, ff. 172
(29), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> (Greg. 318.)
</p>

<p>
245. (Paul. 293.) Crypta Ferrata Α. β. 6 [xi], 9 × 6-¾, ff. 193 (26),
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> (Paul.), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at the end. (Greg. 319.)
</p>

<p>
246. (Paul. 294.) Rom. Vat. Gr. 1208, 11 × 7-7/8, ff. 395 (19), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ. Abbate Cozza-Luzi confirms Berriman's account (pp.
98, 99) of the splendour of this codex. It is written in gold letters
and is said to have belonged to Carlotta, Queen of Jerusalem, Cyprus,
and Armenia, who died at Rome, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1487, and probably gave this
book to pope Innocent VIII, whose arms are painted at the beginning.
It contains effigies of SS. Luke, James, Peter, John, Jude, Paul. (Greg.
326.)
</p>

<p>
247. (Paul. 295.) Rom. Pal.-Vat. Gr. 38 [xi], 8-¾ × 6-1/8, ff. 351 (24),
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. (Greg. 330.)
</p>

<p>
248. (Paul. 298.) Berlin, Königl. (Hamilton) 244 (625) [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1090 ?],
5-7/8 × 4-3/8, ff. 330 (22), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> It contains
the Acts, Cath. and St. Paul, as Dr. C. de Boor informs us. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi>
Greg. 303.)
</p>

<p>
249. (Paul. 299.) Berlin, Königl. Gr. 4to, 40 [xiii, Greg. xi], 10-¾ × 5-¾,
ff. 222 (26), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., same contents as
the preceding. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 252.)
</p>

<p>
250. (Paul. 300.) Berlin, Königl. Gr. 4to, 43 [xi, Greg. xiv], 9-5/8 × 7,
ff. 116 (39), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, same contents
as the preceding, but commences with the Psalms. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 302.)
</p>

<p>
251. (Paul. 301.) Berlin, Königl. Gr. 4to, 57 [xiv, Greg. xiii], 8-5/8 × 6,
ff. ?, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, same contents as Act. 248. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg.
248.)
</p>

<p>
252. (Evan. 642, Paul. 302.) Berlin, Königl. Gr. 8vo, 9. (Greg. 213.)
</p>

<p>
253, 254, 255, 257, 260 were discovered on the spot by Dr. Gregory
not to be Codd. Act.
</p>

<p>
253. (Paul. 248.) Cairo, Patriarch. Alex. Library 8 [xiv], 4to, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>,
Cath. (Greg. 240.)
</p>

<p>
254. (Paul. 275.) Cair. Patr. Alex. Libr. 59 [xi], 4to, Acts and all
Epistles. (Greg. 241.)
</p>

<p>
255. (Paul. 296.) Cair. Patr. Alex. Libr. 88 [xi], fol, Acts and all
Epistles, after Psalms. (Greg. 242.)
</p>

<p>
256. (Paul. 322.) Rom. Vat. Gr. 2099 [x, Greg. xi], 7-¼ × 6, ff. 125
(21), <hi rend='italic'>Euth.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi> Though numbered from <q>Acts,</q> it
contains only the Cath. Epp. (See Greg. 329.)
</p>

<p>
257. (Paul. 303.) Jerusalem, Holy Sepulchre 7 [x], 4to. Act., Cath.,
Paul., begins at Acts xii. 6. (Greg. 183 ?)
</p>

<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>

<p>
258. (Paul. 306.) Jerus. Holy Sep. 15 [x, end], 4to, with rich scholia.
(Greg. 184 ?)
</p>

<p>
259. (Evan. 657.) (Greg. 208.)
</p>

<p>
260. (Evan. 661.) (Greg. 209.)
</p>

<p>
261. (Paul. 336.) Rom. Casanatensis G. ii. 6 [xv or xvi], 12-7/8 × 23-1/8,
ff. ?, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, στίχ., Catholic and Pauline Epistles with a catena.
(See Greg. 321.)
</p>

<p>
The next three were added by the Abbé Martin.
</p>

<p>
262. (Evan. 738.) (Greg. 259.)
</p>

<p>
263. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 906 [xii-xiii], 8-1/8 × 5-¾, ff. 48 (20). <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi>
Acts xi. 5-22; xvi. 1-16; xxii. 10-xxviii. 31; James i. 1-ii. 18;
iv. 3-v. 20. <hi rend='italic'>Prol.</hi> (Greg. 249.)
</p>

<p>
264. (Paul. 337.) Paris, Nat. Coislin. 224 [xi], 10 × 8, ff. 379 (20),
<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Euth.</hi>, Act., Cath., Paul. (Greg. 250.)
</p>

<p>
We now follow Dr. Gregory's order as far as is possible, and refer
students to his pages where Library Catalogues and other sources of
information do not supply particulars.
</p>

<p>
265. (Evan. 808.)
</p>

<p>
266. (Evan. 823.)
</p>

<p>
267. (Evan. 858.) (Greg. 261.)
</p>

<p>
268. (Evan. 698.)
</p>

<p>
269. (Evan. 794.) (Greg. 262.)
</p>

<p>
270. (Evan. 922.)
</p>

<p>
271. (Evan. 927.)
</p>

<p>
272. (Evan. 935.)
</p>

<p>
273. (Evan. 941.)
</p>

<p>
274. (Evan. 945.)
</p>

<p>
275. (Evan. 956.)
</p>

<p>
276. (Evan. 959.)
</p>

<p>
277. (Evan. 986.)
</p>

<p>
278. (Evan. 996.)
</p>

<p>
279. (Evan. 997.)
</p>

<p>
280. (Evan. 999.)
</p>

<p>
281. (Evan. 1003.)
</p>

<p>
282. (Evan. 1040.)
</p>

<p>
283. (Evan. 1058.)
</p>

<p>
284. (Evan. 1072.)
</p>

<p>
285. (Evan. 1073.)
</p>

<p>
286. (Evan. 1075.)
</p>

<p>
287. (Evan. 1094.)
</p>

<p>
288. (Evan. 1149.)
</p>

<p>
289. (Evan. 1240.)
</p>

<p>
290. (Evan. 1241.)
</p>

<p>
291. (Evan. 1242.)
</p>

<p>
292. (Evan. 1243.)
</p>

<p>
293. (Evan. 1244.)
</p>

<p>
294. (Evan. 1245.)
</p>

<p>
295. (Evan. 1246.)
</p>

<p>
296. (Evan. 1247.)
</p>

<p>
297. (Evan. 1248.)
</p>

<p>
298. (Evan. 1249.)
</p>

<p>
299. (Evan. 1250.)
</p>

<p>
300. (Evan. 1251.)
</p>

<p>
301. (Paul. 334, Apoc. 109.) St. Saba 20 [xi, beginning], 4to, Act.,
Cath. (Greg. 243.)
</p>

<p>
302. (Paul. 313.) St. Saba 35 [xi], 4to. (Greg. 244.)
</p>

<p>
303. (Apoc. 185.) Lesbos, τ. Λείμωνος μονῆς 132 [xv], 8-¼ × 5-¼, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at beginning and end.
</p>

<p>
304. (Paul. 331.) Athens, Nat. Theol. (207, 70) [xiii], 6-3/8 × 4-¾, ff. 321.
Very beautiful. Written by Cosmas.
</p>

<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>

<p>
305. (Paul. 332.) Ath. Nat. Theol. (208, 7) [xiv], 7-½ × 5-1/8, ff. 273, with
Œcumenius.
</p>

<p>
306. (Paul. 333.) Ath. Nat. Theol. (209, 72) [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1364], 8-¼ × 5-7/8,
ff. 250. Written by Constantine Alexopoulos. Restored by Nicolaus in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1464.
</p>

<p>
307. (Paul. 469, Apoc. 111.) Ath. Nat. 43 (149 ?) [x], 8-5/8 × 6-3/8.
</p>

<p>
308. (Paul. 420.) Ath. Nat. (45).
</p>

<p>
309. (Paul. 300, Apoc. 124.) Ath. Nat. 64 (91) [x], 9 × 7-1/8, ff. 327.
Apoc. ends at xviii. 22.
</p>

<p>
310. Ath. Nat. 66 (105) [x], 9-7/8 × 7-½, ff. 293. Sixteen homilies of St.
Chrysostom on the Acts. Eight leaves at the beginning are of cent. xiv.
</p>

<p>
311. (Paul. 419.) Ath. Nat. 221 (129 ?) [xiii], 5-7/8 × 4-¼, ff. 224.
</p>

<p>
312. (Paul. 421.) Ath. Nat. (119) [xii], 9-7/8 × 5-½, ff. 356, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
</p>

<p>
313. (Paul. 422.) Ath. Nat. 89 [xii], 11-3/8 × 8-¼, ff. 220. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Acts
i. 1-vii. 35.
</p>

<p>
314. Zante.
</p>

<p>
315. (Paul. 474.) Petersburg, Imp. Porfirianus.
</p>

<p>
316. Madrid, Royal O. 78.
</p>

<p>
317. (Evan. 667.) Coxe, St. Saba 53. (Greg. 211.)
</p>

<p>
318. (Evan. 673.) Coxe, St. Saba 54. (Greg. 212.)
</p>

<p>
319. (Paul. 318.) Patmos 27 [xii], fol., Act., Cath., Paul., with
marginal gloss. Coxe.
</p>

<p>
320. (Paul. 320.) Patmos 31 [ix], fol., Act., Cath., Paul. Coxe.
</p>

<p>
321. (Evan. 796.) (Greg. 263.)
</p>

<p>
322. Athos, Iveron 639.
</p>

<p>
323. (Paul. 429.) Lesb. τ. Λείμ. 55.
</p>

<p>
324. Jerusalem, Holy Cross 1.
</p>

<p>
325. (Paul. 495, Apoc. 187.) Athens, Nat. Libr. 91 [x], 9 × 7-1/8, ff. 327,
<hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> Apoc. xviii. 22-end.
</p>

<p>
326. (Evan. 801.) (Greg. 264.)
</p>

<p>
327. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1227.
</p>

<p>
328. (Evan. 665.) (Greg. 210.)
</p>

<p>
329. (Evan. 1267.)
</p>

<p>
330. (Paul. 491.) Jerus. Patr. Libr. 462 [xiv] ?, 535 pages <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>,
ff. 60 (58 first and 2 last) [xvi], κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>proll.</hi>
</p>

<p>
331. (Paul. 145.) Contains also James, 1 Pet., 2 Pet. i. 1-3.
</p>

<p>
332. (Paul. 434.) Ven. Marc. ii. 114.
</p>

<p>
333. (Paul. 435.) Edinburgh, Mr. Mackellar.
</p>

<p>
334. (Paul. 319.) Rom. Vat. Gr. 1971 [x], 6-¾ × 5-¼, ff. 247 (31),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Euth.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>proll.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, ἀναγν., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg.
268.)
</p>

<p>
335. (Paul. 329.) Vindob. Caes. Gr. Theol. 141. (Greg. 245.)
</p>

<p>
336. Athos, Vatopedi 41.
</p>

<p>
337. Ath. Vat. 201.
</p>

<p>
338. Ath. Vat. 203.
</p>

<p>
339. Ath. Vat. 210.
</p>

<p>
340. Ath. Vat. 259.
</p>

<p>
341. Ath. Vat. 328.
</p>

<p>
342. Ath. Vat. 380.
</p>

<p>
343. Ath. Vat. 419.
</p>

<p>
344. Ath. Dionysius 68.
</p>

<p>
345. Ath. Dion. 75.
</p>

<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>

<p>
346. Ath. Dion. 382.
</p>

<p>
347. Ath. Docheiariou 38.
</p>

<p>
348. Ath. Doch. 48.
</p>

<p>
349. Ath. Doch. 136.
</p>

<p>
350. Ath. Doch. 139.
</p>

<p>
351. Ath. Doch. 147.
</p>

<p>
352. Ath. Esphigmenou 63.
</p>

<p>
353. Ath. Esphig. 64.
</p>

<p>
354. Ath. Esphig. 65.
</p>

<p>
355. Ath. Esphig. 66.
</p>

<p>
356. Ath. Esphig. 67.
</p>

<p>
357. Ath. Esphig. 68.
</p>

<p>
358. Ath. Iveron 24.
</p>

<p>
359. Ath. Iveron 25.
</p>

<p>
360. Ath. Iveron 37.
</p>

<p>
361. Ath. Iveron 57.
</p>

<p>
362. Ath. Iveron 60.
</p>

<p>
363. Ath. Iveron 642.
</p>

<p>
364. Ath. Iveron 643.
</p>

<p>
365. Ath. Iveron 648.
</p>

<p>
366. Ath. Constamonitou 108.
</p>

<p>
367. Ath. Coutloumoussi 16.
</p>

<p>
368. Ath. Coutloum. 57.
</p>

<p>
369. Ath. Coutloum. 80.
</p>

<p>
370. Ath. Coutloum. 81.
</p>

<p>
371. Ath. Coutloum. 82.
</p>

<p>
372. Ath. Coutloum. 83.
</p>

<p>
373. Ath. Coutloum. 275.
</p>

<p>
374. Ath. Paul 2.
</p>

<p>
375. Ath. Protaton 32.
</p>

<p>
376. Ath. Simopetra 42.
</p>

<p>
377. Ath. Stauroniketa 52.
</p>

<p>
378. Ath. Philotheou 38.
</p>

<p>
379. Ath. Philoth. 76.
</p>

<p>
380. Beratinus Archiepisc.
</p>

<p>
381. Cairo, Patriarch. Alex. 942.
</p>

<p>
382. Chalcis, Mon. Trin. 16.
</p>

<p>
383. Chalcis, Schol. 9.
</p>

<p>
384. Chalcis, Schol. 26.
</p>

<p>
385. Chalcis, Schol. 33.
</p>

<p>
386. Chalcis, Schol. 96.
</p>

<p>
387. Patmos, St. John 14.
</p>

<p>
388. Patmos, St. John 15.
</p>

<p>
389. Patmos, St. John 16.
</p>

<p>
390. Patmos, St. John 263.
</p>

<p>
391. Thessalonica, Gr. Gymn. 12.
</p>

<p>
392. Thessalonica, Gr. Gymn. 15.
</p>

<p>
393. Thessalonica, Gr. Gymn. 16.
</p>

<p>
394. Sinaitic 274.
</p>

<p>
395. Sinaitic 275.
</p>

<p>
396. Sinaitic 276.
</p>

<p>
397. Sinaitic 277.
</p>

<p>
398. Sinaitic 278.
</p>

<p>
399. Sinaitic 279.
</p>

<p>
400. Sinaitic 280.
</p>

<p>
401. Sinaitic 281.
</p>

<p>
402. Sinaitic 282.
</p>

<p>
403. Sinaitic 283.
</p>

<p>
404. Sinaitic 284.
</p>

<p>
405. Sinaitic 285.
</p>

<p>
406. Sinaitic 287.
</p>

<p>
407. Sinaitic 288.
</p>

<p>
408. Sinaitic 289.
</p>

<p>
409. Sinaitic 290.
</p>

<p>
410. Sinaitic 291.
</p>

<p>
411. Sinaitic 292.
</p>

<p>
412. Sinaitic 293.
</p>

<p>
413. Sinaitic 300.
</p>

<p>
414. Sinaitic 301.
</p>

<p>
415. (Paul. 329.) Vindob. Caes. Gr. Theol. 150. (Greg. 246.)
From Ἱεροσολυμιτικὴ Βιβλιοθήκη, by Papadopoulos Kerameus.
</p>

<p>
416. (Paul. 58, Apoc. 181.) Jerusalem, Patriarch. Libr. 38 [xi beg.],
9-3/8 × 7-½, ff. 280 (i.e. 89 + 234), (<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi> for July and August [xiii]), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>,
</p>

<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> Acts i. 1-11, Life of St. Paul. Heb. at end of Paul. Written
at Constantinople by Theophanes. Belonged to Matthew a monk, and
to monastery of St. Saba.
</p>

<p>
417. (Paul. 64.) Jerus. Patr. Libr. 43 [xii], 8-7/8 × 6, ff. 138 (28).
<hi rend='italic'>Prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> Acts i. 1-xii. 9. Epp. of Paul with Heb. at end follow
Acts. Came from St. Saba.
</p>

<p>
From Ἔκθεσις Παλαιογραφικῶν καὶ Φιλολογικῶν Ἐρεύνων ἐν Θράκῃ καὶ
Μακεδονίᾳ, by Papadopoulos Kerameus.
</p>

<p>
418. (Paul. 492.) Cosinitsa, Ἁγία Μονή, Ματθαῖος ἱερεύς 54 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1344],
Acts, Cath. Epp. Written by the aforenamed.
</p>

<p>
From Καταλόγος τῶν ἐν ταῖς Βιβλιοθήκαις τοῦ Ἁγίου Ὄρους Ἑλληνικῶν
Κωδίκων ὑπὸ Σπυρίδωνος Π. Λαμπρός 1888.
</p>

<p>
419. (Paul. 493, Apoc. 185.) Athos, Monastery of St. Paul 2 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
800 ??], 4to, said to have been written by the Empress Mary, who had
been divorced by Constantine VI, and shut up in a convent in Cilicia.
At the end of the Apoc. it has the subscription, σταυρέ, φύλαττε βασίλισσαν
Μαρίαν. Some leaves in the beginning and middle <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> [xviii].
</p>

<p>
420. (Paul. 494.) Athens, Nat. Libr. 222 [xvii], 12-1/8 × 7-7/8, ff. 246.
After the Κατηχήσεις of Theodorus Studita, Act., Cath., Paul.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XI. Cursive Manuscripts Of St. Paul's Epistles.</head>

<p>
*1. (Evan. 1.)
</p>

<p>
2. (Act. 2.)
</p>

<p>
3. (Evan. 3.)
</p>

<p>
4. (Act. 4.)
</p>

<p>
5. (Evan. 5.)
</p>

<p>
6. (Evan. 6.)
</p>

<p>
7. Basil. A. N. iii. 11, 11-¼ × 8-½, ff. 387 (11), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, with notes and
a finely written marginal commentary, ends Heb. xii. 18. But Rom.,
1, 2 Cor. are in a different hand. It is plain that Erasmus must have
used this copy, cf. Rom. v. 21; vi. 19; viii. 35; xv. 31; xvi. 22;
1 Cor. xi. 15; 2 Cor. v. 4; ix. 8; 12; Gal. i. 6; iii. 27; Phil. iii. 9;
Col. i. 6; iii. 17; 1 Thess. i. 7; Tit. iii. 8; Philem. 15; Heb. v. 4; vii.
5, in all which places it countenances peculiar readings of his first
edition. It contained τό in Rom. iv. 4, but not καὶ πεισθέντες in Heb.
xi. 13 (Wetstein, Hoskier).
</p>

<p>
8. (Act. 50.)
</p>

<p>
9. (Act. 7.)
</p>

<p>
10. (Act. 8.)
</p>

<p>
11. (Act. 9.)
</p>

<p>
12. (Act. 10.) <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Act. 7.
</p>

<p>
13. Certain readings cited by J. le Fevre d'Etaples, in his commentary
on St. Paul's Epistles, Paris, 1512.
</p>

<p>
14. (Evan. 90.)
</p>

<p>
15. A manuscript cited by Erasmus, belonging to Amandus of Louvain.
</p>

<p>
16. (Act. 12.)
</p>

<p>
*17. (Evan. 33.) <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Act. 7.
</p>

<p>
18. (Evan. 35.)
</p>

<p>
19. (Act. 16.)
</p>

<p>
20. Par. Nat. Coislin. Gr. 27, described (as is Cod. 23) by Montfaucon
[x], 13-¾ × 10-½, ff. 252 (39), in bad condition, with <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> and
a catena, from Laura at Athos (Wetstein). <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Act. 7.
</p>

<p>
21. (Act. 17.)
</p>

<p>
22. (Act. 18.)
</p>

<p>
23. Par. Nat. Coisl. Gr. 28 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1056], 14-¾ × 10-½, ff. 272 (47), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. (Wetstein, Scholz). From Laura.
</p>

<p>
24. (Evan. 105.)
</p>

<p>
25. (Act. 20.)
</p>

<p>
26. (Act. 21.)
</p>

<p>
27. Cambr. Univ. Libr. Ff. i. 30 [xii], 11-¾ × 8-¼, ff. 169 (varies),
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., with Œcumenius' commentary:
Rom. and 1, 2 Cor. are wanting (Wetstein, 1716). Bradshaw found
that this manuscript, which came to Cambridge in 1574, is only the
second part of Paul. 42, the last quire of the latter being numbered κα᾽,
while the first in Cod. 27 is κβ᾽. Hort's Paul. 27 is k<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> or Paul. 260.
</p>

<p>
28. (Act. 23.)
</p>

<p>
*29. (Act. 24.)
</p>

<p>
*30. (Act. 53.)
</p>

<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>

<p>
31. (Act. 25.)
</p>

<p>
32. (Act. 26.)
</p>

<p>
33. (Act. 27.)
</p>

<p>
*34. (Act. 28.)
</p>

<p>
35. (Act. 29.)
</p>

<p>
36. (Act. 30.)
</p>

<p>
*37. (Evan. 69.)
</p>

<p>
38. (Evan. 51.)
</p>

<p>
39. (Act. 33.)
</p>

<p>
*40. (Evan. 61.)
</p>

<p>
41. (Evan. 57.)
</p>

<p>
42. Oxf. Magdalen Coll. Gr. 7 [xii], 11-¾ × 8-¼, ff. 170 (varies), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
κεφ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, contains Rom., 1, 2 Cor. surrounded by Œcumenius' commentary
(Walton's Polyglott, Mill). First part of Paul. 27.
</p>

<p>
43. (Act. 37.)
</p>

<p>
*44. (Act. 38.)
</p>

<p>
45. (Act. 39.)
</p>

<p>
46. (Act. 40.)
</p>

<p>
47. Oxf. Bodl. Roe 16 [xi], 11-3/8 × 8-½, ff. 255 (15), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ.,
with a Patristic catena, in a small and beautiful hand, having a text
much resembling that of Cod. A, and Cod. B still more often when the
two stand alone: its history is the same as that of Evan. 49. The
Epistle to the Hebrews precedes 1 Tim. (Mill, Roe 2, Tregelles for
his edition of the N. T.: inspected by Vansittart.)
</p>

<p>
*48. (Act. 42.)
</p>

<p>
49. (Evan. 76.)
</p>

<p>
50. (Act. 52.)
</p>

<p>
51. (Evan. 82, Act. 44, Apoc. 5.)
</p>

<p>
52. (Act. 45.)
</p>

<p>
53 of Wetstein is now Paul. Cod. M, the portion containing the
Hebrews, or Bengel's Uffenbach 2 or 1. Instead&mdash;
(Evan. 1149.) (Greg. 336.)
</p>

<p>
54. Monacensis Reg. Gr. 412 [xii], 11-7/8 × 8-3/8, ff. 358 (24), is Bengel's
August. 5 (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Act. 46), containing Rom. vii. 7-xvi. 24, with a catena
from twenty Greek authors (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Paul. 127), stated by Bengel to
resemble that in the Bodleian described by Mill (N. T., Proleg. § 1448).
</p>

<p>
55. (Act. 46.)
</p>

<p>
56. This is worthless as being a transcript of Erasmus' first edition,
then just published. Instead&mdash;
(Evan. 1262.)
</p>

<p>
*57. (Evan. 218.)
</p>

<p>
58. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1650<note place='foot'>From the monastery of Grotta Ferrata, near Tusculum, <q>Ubi degunt ab
antiquo tempore monachi, ordinis S. Basilii Magni, ritum Italo-Graecum observantes,</q>
Holmes. Praef. ad Pentateuch. on his Cod. 128, which came to the
Vatican from the same place. It is the traditional Villa Luculli.</note> = Act. 156, Paul. 190. Instead&mdash;
(Act. 416.)
</p>

<p>
59. Par. Nat. Coisl. Gr. 204 [xi], 11 × 8-7/8, ff. 312 (32). <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Rom.,
1 Cor., 2 Cor. is in the 3rd of 3 vols. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Cramer's Catena. (Greg.)
Wetstein and Griesbach comprise readings of two Medicean manuscripts
of the Ephes. and Philipp., derived from the same source as Evan. 102,
Act. 56, Apoc. 23.
</p>

<p>
60. Codices cited in the Correctorium Bibliorum Latinorum.
</p>

<p>
*61. (Act. 61.)
</p>

<p>
62. (Act. 59.)
</p>

<p>
63. (Act. 60.)
</p>

<p>
64 of Griesbach is the portion of Evan. M. Instead&mdash;
(Act. 417.)
</p>

<p>
65. (Act. 62.)
</p>

<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>

<p>
66. Lond. Brit. Mus. Harl. 5552 [xvi], 6-½ × 4-¼, ff. 233 (18). This
number included readings extracted by Griesbach from the margin of this
MS., which itself he considers but a transcript of Erasmus' first edition
(Symb. Crit., p. 166).
</p>

<p>
67. (Act. 66.) 67** resembles Cod. B, yet is independent of it (Eph.
iii. 9, iv. 9, &amp;c.). <q>These marginal readings must have been derived
from a MS. having a text nearly akin to that of the fragmentary MS.
called M, though not from M itself</q> (Hort, Introduction, p. 155).
</p>

<p>
68. (Act. 63.)
</p>

<p>
69. (Act. 64.)
</p>

<p>
70. (Act. 67.)
</p>

<p>
71. Vindobon. Caesar. Gr. 61 [xii, Greg. x or xi], 9-½ × 6-¾, ff. 170 (29),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, μαρτ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, ἀναγν., στίχ. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi>
Rom. i. 1-4; ii. 3-8, &amp;c. Titus; Philem.; with Hebrews before 1 Tim.
It includes a commentary and catechetical lectures of St. Cyril of
Jerusalem (Alter, Birch, Greg.).
</p>

<p>
72. (Evan. 234.)
</p>

<p>
73. (Act. 68.)
</p>

<p>
74. (Act. 69.)
</p>

<p>
75. (Brit. Mus. Add. 5116, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Act. 22.)
</p>

<p>
*76. Leipzig, Univ. Gr. 361 [xiii], 12-½ × 9-½, ff. out of 327, 85 (35),
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ., contains Rom., 1 Cor., Gal., and part of Eph., with Theophylact's
commentary, and other matter (Matthaei, Gregory).
</p>

<p>
Codd. 77-112 were cursorily collated by Birch, and nearly all by
Scholz.
</p>

<p>
77. (Evan. 131.)
</p>

<p>
78. (Evan. 133.)
</p>

<p>
79. (Act. 72.)
</p>

<p>
80. (Act. 73<note place='foot'>Birch shows the connexion of Caryophilus with this important copy (which
much resembles the Leicester manuscript, Evan. Cod. 69) from James v. 5, and
especially from 3 John 5 μισθόν for πιστόν, a <hi rend='italic'>lectio singularis</hi>. In this codex, as in
the others cited, Heb. stands before 1 Tim.</note>)
</p>

<p>
81. Rom. Vat. Gr. 761 [xii], 13-¾ × 10, ff. 266, <hi rend='italic'>Euth.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>,
στίχ., with Œcumenius' commentary. The Epistle to the Hebrews is
wanting.
</p>

<p>
82. Rom. Vat. Gr. 762 [xii], 12-1/8 × 9, ff. 411, <hi rend='italic'>Euth.</hi>, contains Rom.,
1, 2 Cor., with a catena.
</p>

<p>
83. Rom. Vat. Gr. 765 [xi], 14-1/8 × 11-5/8, ff. 177, <hi rend='italic'>Euth.</hi>, with a commentary.
</p>

<p>
84. Rom. Vat. Gr. 766 [xii], 14-¾ × 11-3/8, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., with a commentary.
</p>

<p>
85. (Apoc. 39.) Rom. Vat. Gr. 1136 [xiii, Greg. xiv], 10 × 6-¾, ff. 60 (46),
contains <emph>first</emph> the Apocalypse (beginning ch. iii. 8) with a Latin version,
then St. Paul's Epistles ending 1 Tim. vi. 5, with many unusual readings.
</p>

<p>
86. (Evan. 141.)
</p>

<p>
87. (Evan. 142.)
</p>

<p>
88. (Evan. 149.)
</p>

<p>
89. (Act. 78.)
</p>

<p>
90. (Act. 79.)
</p>

<p>
91. (Act. 80.)
</p>

<p>
92. (Evan. 180.)
</p>

<p>
93. (Act. 83.)
</p>

<p>
94. (Act. 84.)
</p>

<p>
95. (Act. 85.)
</p>

<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>

<p>
96. (Act. 86.) The same copy as Paul. 183 in the last edition.
</p>

<p>
97. (Act. 87.)
</p>

<p>
98. (Act. 88.)
</p>

<p>
99. (Act. 89.)
</p>

<p>
100. Flor. Laurent. x. 4 [xii], 12-½ × 9-½, ff. 426 (28), with a commentary
and additional scholia [xiv], from the Cistercian monastery of
S. Salvator de Septimo, in the diocese of Florence.
</p>

<p>
101. Flor. Laurent. x. 6 [xi, Greg. x], 13-½ × 10-¼, ff. 285, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., with a catena supplying the authors' names.
</p>

<p>
102. Flor. Laurent. x. 7 [xi], 13 × 9-5/8, ff. 270, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>,
στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, a life of St. Paul, and catena with such names attached
as Theodoret, Chrysostom, Œcumenius, Severianus, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
103. Flor. Laurent. x. 19 [xiii], 9-¾ × 7-3/8, ff. 260, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, with a catena. At the end is a date,
'<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1318, Ind. 1, Timotheus.'
</p>

<p>
*104. (Evan. 201 or h<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>.) Examined by Bloomfield.
</p>

<p>
105. (Evan. 204.) Dean Burgon has received a facsimile of 1 Tim.
iii. 16 from the librarian at Bologna.
</p>

<p>
106. (Evan. 205.)
</p>

<p>
107. (Evan. 206.)
</p>

<p>
108. (Evan. 209.)
</p>

<p>
*109. (Act. 96.)
</p>

<p>
*110. Venet. Marc. 33 [xi], 15-¾ × 12-7/8, ff. 369, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, with a catena, much
being taken from Œcumenius (Rink, as also 111, 112: <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Act. 96).
</p>

<p>
*111. Ven. Marc. 34 [xi], 13-1/8 × 10-½, ff. 332, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>vers</hi>., with a commentary.
</p>

<p>
*112. Ven. Marc. 35 [xi], 14-½ × 11-¾, ff. 159 (40), with a commentary,
a fragment beginning 2 Cor. i. 20, ending Heb. x. 25; <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> 1 Thess.
iv. 13-2 Thess. ii. 14.
</p>

<p>
Codd. 113-124 were collated by Matthaei.
</p>

<p>
*113. (Act. 98.)
</p>

<p>
*114. (Act. 99.)
</p>

<p>
*115. (Act. 100.)
</p>

<p>
*116. (Act. 101.)
</p>

<p>
*117. (Act. 102.)
</p>

<p>
*118. (Act. 103.)
</p>

<p>
*119. Mosc. Synod. 292 [x-xii], 4to, ff. 462, from the monastery of
Pantocrator on Athos, contains 1, 2 Corinth., with Theophylact's commentary.
(Matthaei.)
</p>

<p>
*120. (Evan. 241.)
</p>

<p>
*121. (Evan. 242.)
</p>

<p>
*122. (Act. 106.)
</p>

<p>
*123. Mosc. Syn. 99 [x or xi], fol., ff. 241, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, with scholia,
from St. Athanasius' monastery (Laura).
</p>

<p>
*124. Mosc. Syn. 250 (Mt. q) [xiv], 8vo, ff. 40 (i.e. 117-157), on
cotton paper, from the monastery of Vatopedi on Athos, contains Rom. i-xiii,
with Theophylact's commentary and other writings.
</p>

<p>
Codd. 125-230 were first catalogued by Scholz, who professes to have
collated entire Paul. 177-179, in the greater part Paul. 157, the rest
slightly or not at all.
</p>

<p>
125. Munich, Reg. Gr. 504 [<hi rend='italic'>dated</hi> Feb. 1, 1387, Indict. 10], 8-5/8 × 5-½, ff.
381 (33), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, on cotton paper, with Theophylact's commentary in black
<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>
ink, and the text (akin to it) in red. Bought by Nicetas <q>primicerius
sceuophylactus</q> for eight golden ducats of Rhodes<note place='foot'>The gold ducat coined for the Military Order of St. John at Rhodes (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi>
Ducange) was worth 9<hi rend='italic'>s</hi>. 6<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>. English money.</note>.  <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Philemon.
</p>

<p>
126. Munich, Reg. Gr. 455, either a copy of, or derived from Cod. 125.
[<hi rend='italic'>dated</hi> Feb. 17, Indict. 12, probably <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1389], 10-½ × 8-¼, ff. 439 (32),
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, also <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> Philem.; with Theophylact's commentary, and some
homilies of Chrysostom. From internal reasons 125 is probably the older
of the two (J. Rendel Harris).
</p>

<p>
127. Munich, Reg. Gr. 110 [xvi], 13-1/8 × 8-½, ff. 112, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, once at the
Jesuits' College, Munich, contains Rom. vii. 7-ix. 21, with a catena. It
was found by Scholz to be, what indeed it professes, a mere copy of part
of Cod. 54. (Greg. 54<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
128. (Act. 179.)
</p>

<p>
129. Munich, Reg. Gr. 35 [xvi], 13-5/8 × 8-½, ff. 488 (30), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, with
catena.
</p>

<p>
130. (Evan. 43.)
</p>

<p>
131. (Evan. 330.)
</p>

<p>
*132. (Evan. 18: <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Act. 113.)
</p>

<p>
133. (Act. 51.)
</p>

<p>
*134. (Act. 114.)
</p>

<p>
135. (Act. 115.)
</p>

<p>
136. (Act. 116.)
</p>

<p>
*137. (Evan. 263.) <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Act. 7.
</p>

<p>
138. (Act. 118.)
</p>

<p>
*139. (Act. 119), Reiche, as also
</p>

<p>
*140. (Act. 11.)
</p>

<p>
141. (Act. 120.)
</p>

<p>
142. (Act. 121.)
</p>

<p>
143. (Act. 122.)
</p>

<p>
144. (Act. 123.)
</p>

<p>
145. Par. Nat. Gr. 108, 109, 110, 111 [xvi, Greg. xv], 7 × 4-¾,
ff. 308 (14), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Gal., Eph. (2 Cor. xiii. 1-13
later). Written by George Hermonymus. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Act. 331. (Gregory
under Act. 331.) Once Colbert's, as were 146, 147, 148.
</p>

<p>
146, 147, 148&mdash;included under 145.
</p>

<p>
149. (Act. 124.)
</p>

<p>
150. (Act. 125.)
</p>

<p>
151. Par. Nat. Gr. 126 [xvi], 4-3/8 × 3, ff. 168 (18), <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, written (like
149) by Angelus Vergecius.
</p>

<p>
152. Instead of Par. Nat. Gr. 136<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi> (omit Greg.)&mdash;
(Evan. 657.) (Greg. 264.)
</p>

<p>
*153. (Act. 126) Reiche.
</p>

<p>
154. (Act. 127.)
</p>

<p>
155. (Act. 128.)
</p>

<p>
156. (Act. 129.)
</p>

<p>
157. Par. Nat. Gr. 222 [xi], 12-½ × 10-1/8, ff. 227, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, once Colbert's,
brought from Constantinople in 1676, with a commentary.  Rom. i.
1-11; 21-29; iii. 26-iv. 8; ix. 11-22; 1 Cor. xv. 22-43; Col. i. 1-16.
</p>

<p>
158. (Act. 131.)
</p>

<p>
159. (Apoc. 64.) Par. Nat. Gr. 224 [xi], 11-¾ × 8-¾, ff. 274, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τιτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., very elegant. The Pauline Epistles have
a catena, the Apocalypse Arethas' commentary.
</p>

<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>

<p>
160. Par. Nat. Gr. 225 [xvi], 12 × 8, ff. 401 (29), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, a fragment
of St. Paul, with Theophylact's commentary.
</p>

<p>
161. Par. Nat. Gr. 226 [xvi], 12-¼ × 8-½, ff. 96 (34), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, contains the
Romans, with a commentary.
</p>

<p>
162. Par. Nat. Gr 227 [xvi], 13-½ × 9, ff. 213 (31), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, once Bigot's,
contains a catena on 1 Cor. xvi.
</p>

<p>
163. Par. Nat. Gr. 238 [xiii], 7-¾ × 5-¼, ff. 391 (23), from Adrianople,
contains Heb. i-viii, with a catena.
</p>

<p>
164. Par. Nat. Gr. 849 [xvi], 12-7/8 × 9-1/8, ff. 261 (30), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, once a Medicean manuscript, contains Theodoret's commentary
with text.
</p>

<p>
165. Turin, Univ. C. vi. 29 [xvi], 8-1/8 × 5-5/8, ff. 71 (17), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, contains
from 1 Thess. to Hebrews.
</p>

<p>
166. (Act. 133.)
</p>

<p>
167. (Act. 134.)
</p>

<p>
168. Turin, Univ. C. v. 10, 8-5/8 × 6-3/8, ff. 239 (29), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, στίχ.,
and a commentary: it begins Rom. iii. 19.
</p>

<p>
169. (Act. 136.)
</p>

<p>
170. (Evan. 339.)
</p>

<p>
171. Milan, Ambros. B. 6 inf. [xiii], 13-1/8 × 10-¼, ff. 241, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., with a commentary: it ends Heb. iv. 7, and Rom. i.
1-2 Cor. v. 19 are later, on cotton paper.
</p>

<p>
172. Milan, Ambr. A. 51 sup. [xii], 8-1/8 × 6-5/8, ff. 175 (35), <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, with an abridgement of Chrysostom's commentary: bought at
Reggio in Calabria, 1606.
</p>

<p>
173. (Act. 138.)
</p>

<p>
174. (Act. 139.)
</p>

<p>
175. Milan, Ambr. F. 125 sup. [xv], 12-1/8 × 7-½, ff. 341 (30), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, with
a continuous commentary: it was brought from Thessaly.
</p>

<p>
176. (Act. 137.)
</p>

<p>
*177. Modena, Este ii. A. 14 [xv], 16mo. Lost (Greg.).
</p>

<p>
*178. (Act. 142.)
</p>

<p>
*179. Modena, Este ii. G. 3,&mdash;the minuscule part of Act. H. The
Pauline Epistles with a commentary are [xii].
</p>

<p>
180. (Evan. 363.)
</p>

<p>
181. (Evan. 643.)
</p>

<p>
182. (Evan. 367.)
</p>

<p>
183. (Act. 254.)
</p>

<p>
184. (Act. 148.)
</p>

<p>
185. (Evan. 393.)
</p>

<p>
186. (Evan. 394.)
</p>

<p>
187. (Act. 154.)
</p>

<p>
188. (Act. 155.)
</p>

<p>
189. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1649 [xiii], 12-7/8 × 10, ff. 137 (48), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>,
with Theodoret's commentary: Heb. precedes 1 Tim.
</p>

<p>
190. (Act. 156.)
</p>

<p>
191. (Act. 157.)
</p>

<p>
192. (Act. 158.)
</p>

<p>
193. (Act. 160.)
</p>

<p>
194. (Evan. 175.)
</p>

<p>
195. Rom. Vat. Ottob. 31 [x, Greg. xi], 14-5/8 × 10-¼, ff. 181, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> Rom.
<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>
and most of 1 Cor.; with a continuous commentary, and such names as
Œcumenius, Theodoret, Methodius, occasionally mentioned.
</p>

<p>
196. Rom. Vat. Ottob. 61 [xv], 9-¾ × 6-¾, ff. 198 (48), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, with
a commentary: here, as in Paul. 189, the Epistle to the Hebrews precedes
1 Tim.
</p>

<p>
197. (Apoc. 78.) Rom. Vat. Ottob. 176 [xv], 8vo, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
</p>

<p>
198. (Act. 161.)
</p>

<p>
199. (Evan. 386.)
</p>

<p>
200. (Act. 162.)
</p>

<p>
201. (Act. 163.)
</p>

<p>
202. Rom. Vat. Ottob. 356 [xv], 9-½ × 6-5/8, ff. 144 (22), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, 'olim
Aug. ducis ab Altamps,' contains Rom. with a catena.
</p>

<p>
203. (Evan. 390.)
</p>

<p>
204. (Act. 166.)
</p>

<p>
205. (Act. 168.)
</p>

<p>
206. (Act. 169.)
</p>

<p>
207. Rom. Ghigian. R. v. 32 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1394], 10 × 6-3/8, ff. 279 (42), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>,
with a commentary.
</p>

<p>
208. Rom. Ghigian. R. viii. 55 [xi], 14-¾ × 10-5/8, ff. 168, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., with Theodoret's commentary.
</p>

<p>
209. (Act. 171.)
</p>

<p>
210. (Act. 172.)
</p>

<p>
211. (Act. 173.)
</p>

<p>
212. (Act. 174.)
</p>

<p>
213. Rom. Barberin. iv. 85 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1338, Greg. 1330 ?], 10-5/8 × 8-1/8,
ff. 267, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., scholia. From the reading τοῦ θεοῦ
καὶ πατρὸς τοῦ χριστοῦ Col. ii. 2 (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> below, Vol. II. Chap. XII), this must
be one of the Barberini manuscripts described under Evan. 112.
</p>

<p>
214. Vindobon. Caesar. theol. 167 (166 ?) [xv, Greg. xiv], 9-3/8 × 6-¼,
ff. 70 (40), on cotton paper, contains Rom. with a catena, 1 Cor. with
Chrysostom's and Theodoret's commentaries, which influence the readings
of the text.
</p>

<p>
215. (Act. 140.)
</p>

<p>
216. (Act. 175.)
</p>

<p>
217. Palermo, I.E. 11 [xii, Greg. x], 8-5/8 × 6-¾, ff. 61 (23), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., begins 2 Cor. iv. 18; <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> 2 Tim. i. 8-ii. 14; ends
Heb. ii. 9.
</p>

<p>
218. (Evan. 421.)
</p>

<p>
219. (Evan. 122.)
</p>

<p>
220. (Evan. 400.)
</p>

<p>
*221. (Evan. 440) is o<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>.
</p>

<p>
222. (Evan. 451.) (Greg. 462.)
</p>

<p>
223. (Evan. 461.) (Greg. 463.)
</p>

<p>
224. (Act. 58.)
</p>

<p>
Substitute for 225 ( = Cod. 11)&mdash;
</p>

<p>
225. Milan, N. 272 sup. [xvi], 9-3/8 × 6-1/8, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <q>S. Pauli Epistolae,
cum notis marginalibus</q> (Burgon). (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 478.)
</p>

<p>
Substitute for 226 ( = Cod. 27)&mdash;
</p>

<p>
226. Florence, Libreria Riccardi 85, rather modern, 8vo, <q>Marsilii
Ficini Florentini.</q>
</p>

<p>
227. (Act. 56 of Scholz.)
</p>

<p>
228. (Evan. 226.)
</p>

<p>
229. (Evan. 228.)
</p>

<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>

<p>
230. (Instead of Evan. 368) (Evan. 665)<note place='foot'>Here again we set Scholz's codices in a note, substituting others in their
room. Scholz's run, 231. (Act. 183.) 232. (Act. 184.) 233. (Act. 185.) 234.
(Evan. 457.) 235. (Evan. 462.) 236. (Act. 188.) 237. (Evan. 466.) 243. (Act.
182), two separate codices.</note>. (Greg. 266.)
</p>

<p>
231. (Evan. 531.) (Greg. 305.)
</p>

<p>
232. Escurial ψ. iii. 2 [xv], Montana after Haenel, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> (Greg. 472.)
</p>

<p>
233. Parham 6 (Evan. 534). (Greg. 258.)
</p>

<p>
234. (Act. 216.) (Greg. 281.)
</p>

<p>
235. (Act. 217.) (Greg. 282.)
</p>

<p>
236. (Act. 218.) (Greg. 283.)
</p>

<p>
237. (Act. 309.) (Greg. 300.)
</p>

<p>
238. (Evan. 431.)
</p>

<p>
239. (Evan. 189.)
</p>

<p>
240. (Evan. 444.) (Greg. 240.)
</p>

<p>
241. (Act. 97.)
</p>

<p>
242. (Act. 178.) (Greg. 242.)
</p>

<p>
243. (Evan. 605.) (Greg. 303.)
</p>

<p>
244. (Evan. 503.)
</p>

<p>
245. (Act. 191.)
</p>

<p>
246. (Act. 192.)
</p>

<p>
247. (Act. 210.)
</p>

<p>
248. (Instead of Act. 201 = 89) (Act. 253). (Greg. 284.)
</p>

<p>
Next follow three at Oxford:
</p>

<p>
249. (Evan. 488.) (Greg. 247.)
</p>

<p>
250. (Act. 212.) (Greg. 276.)
</p>

<p>
251. (Act. 213.) (Greg. 277.)
</p>

<p>
The next ten are Scrivener's, collated in the Appendix to Codex
Augiensis:
</p>

<p>
*252. (Act. 182.) (Greg. 270.)
</p>

<p>
*253. (Act. 183.) (Greg. 271.)
</p>

<p>
*254. (Act. 184.) (Greg. 272.)
</p>

<p>
*255. (Act. 185.) (Greg. 273.)
</p>

<p>
*256. (Apoc. 93.) Lambeth 1186 or e<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> [xi], 4to, of which a facsimile
is given in the Catalogue of Manuscripts at Lambeth, 1812. It contains
the Pauline Epistles and the Apocalypse only. It begins Rom. xvi. 15
and ends Apoc. xix. 4. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> 1 Cor. iv. 19-vi. 1; x. 1-21; Heb. iii.
14-ix. 19; Apoc. xiv. 16-xv. 7. <hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, τίτλ., κεφ., to each
Epistle, and a few marginal glosses. (Greg. 290.)
</p>

<p>
*257. (Evan. 543.) (Greg. 251.)
</p>

<p>
*258. (Evan. 542.) (Greg. 249.)
</p>

<p>
*259. (Evan. 568.) *[h<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>: <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Act. 189.] (Greg. 250.)
</p>

<p>
*260. (Evan. 507.) This is Hort's Paul. 27. (Greg. 252.)
</p>

<p>
261. Petersburg, Muralt. 8 (Evan. 476). (Greg. 131.)
</p>

<p>
262. (Act. 223.) (Greg. 248.)
</p>

<p>
263. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Apoc. 91. Contains Heb. ix. 14-xiii. 25 [xv]. (Greg. 293.)
</p>

<p>
The Baroness Burdett-Coutts has three copies of the Pauline Epistles:
</p>

<p>
*264. (Act. 220.) (Greg. 278.)
</p>

<p>
*265. (Act. 221.) (Greg. 279.)
</p>

<p>
*266. (Evan. 603, Apoc. 89.) Burdett-Coutts (Highgate) II. 4 [x or
xi], 11-½ × 8-½, ff. 67, <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>proll.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, τίτλ. (not in Apocalypse). The
ten Pauline Epistles from the Ephesians onwards (that to the Hebrews
preceding 1 Timothy), and the Apocalypse complete. On three leaves at
the end is the (unfinished) ἐπίγραμμα of Dorotheus of Tyre described
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
above, Act. 89. Citations from the Old Testament are specially marked,
and the margin contains some scholia and corrections, apparently by the
first hand. (Greg. 306.)
</p>

<p>
267. Brit. Mus. Add. 7142 [xiii], 11-¾ × 9, ff. 198, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, Life of St. Paul,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ. (<hi rend='italic'>lect.</hi> mostly later), <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., with commentary,
partly <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> (Greg. 291.)
</p>

<p>
268. (Evan. 576.) (Greg. 253.)
</p>

<p>
269. (Evan. 584.) (Greg. 255.)
</p>

<p>
270. (Act. 229.) (Greg. 275.)
</p>

<p>
271. (Evan. 603.) (Greg. 306.)
</p>

<p>
272. (Act. 238.) (Greg. 436.)
</p>

<p>
273. (Act. 236.) (Greg. 437.)
</p>

<p>
274. (Act. 237.) (Greg. 319.)
</p>

<p>
275. Instead of Basil. (only a comm., Greg.)&mdash;(Act. 254.) (Greg. 285.)
</p>

<p>
276. (Act. 321.) (Greg. 312.)
</p>

<p>
277. (Evan. 492.) (Greg. 256.)
</p>

<p>
278. (Evan. 560.) (Greg. 307.)
</p>

<p>
279. (Evan. 582.) (Greg. 254.)
</p>

<p>
280. (Act. 198.) (Greg. 280.)
</p>

<p>
281. (Evan. 527.) (Greg. 304.)
</p>

<p>
282. (Act. 240, Apoc. 109.) (Greg. 259.)
</p>

<p>
283. (Act. 241.) (Greg. 426.)
</p>

<p>
284. (Act. 195), Rom. i. 1-5.
</p>

<p>
285. (Act. 196.) (Greg. 476.)
</p>

<p>
286. Milan, Ambr. E. 2 infra [xiii], 13-¼ × 10-¼, ff. 268 (32), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
Four leaves in vellum [xii], 2 cols. The catena of Nicetas <q>textus
particulatim praemittit commentariis.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 393.)
</p>

<p>
287. Milan, Ambr. A. 241 inf. [xvi], 12-7/8 × 8-¾, ff. 104 (20), copy of
the preceding. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 393<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>.) <q>Est Catena ejusdem auctoris ex,
initio, sed non complectitur totum opus.</q>
</p>

<p>
288. Milan, Ambr. D. 541 inf. [xi], 15 × 12-¼, ff. 323, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. Text and catena on all St. Paul's Epistles. Came from
Thessaly. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 392.)
</p>

<p>
289. Milan, Ambr. C. 295 inf. [xi], 14 × 11-1/8, ff. 190, <hi rend='italic'>Prol.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. With a catena. (See Greg. 391.)
</p>

<p>
290. (Evan. 622, Act. 242, Apoc. 110.) (Greg. 316.)
</p>

<p>
291. (Act. 243.) (Greg. 423.)
</p>

<p>
292. (Act. 244.) (Greg. 424.)
</p>

<p>
293. (Act. 245.) (Greg. 425.)
</p>

<p>
294. (Act. 246.) (Greg. 430.)
</p>

<p>
295. (Act. 247.) (Greg. 433.)
</p>

<p>
296. Already mentioned as 213 (Gregory): instead&mdash;
(Act. 255.) (Greg. 286.)
</p>

<p>
297. Rom. Barberini vi. 13 [xi, Greg. xii], 13-5/8 × 10-½, ff. 195 (18),
with scholia, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> (Cf. Greg. 396.)
</p>

<p>
298. (Act. 248.) (Greg. 261.)
</p>

<p>
299. (Act. 249.) (Greg. 302.)
</p>

<p>
300. (Act. 250.) (Greg. 260.)
</p>

<p>
301. (Act. 251.) (Greg. 298.)
</p>

<p>
302. (Evan. 642, Act. 252.) (Greg. 269.)
</p>

<p>
303. Already mentioned as 225 (Gregory): instead&mdash;
(Act. 257.) (Greg. 231.)
</p>

<p>
304. (Evan. 661.) (Greg. 265.)
</p>

<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>

<p>
305. Rom. Vat. Gr. 549 [xii], 8-¼ × 8-¼ (?), ff. 380 (29), with Theophylact's
commentary. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 398.)
</p>

<p>
306. Only a commentary of St. Chrysostom, instead&mdash;
(Act. 258.) (Greg. 232.)
</p>

<p>
307. Rom. Vat. Gr. 551 [x], ff. 283, some of St. Paul's Epistles, with
commentary of Chrysostom. (Greg. under 398.)
</p>

<p>
308. Rom. Vat. Gr. 552 [xi], ff. 155, Hebrews, with commentary of
Chrysostom. (Greg. under 398.)
</p>

<p>
Codd. 309, 316, 318, 320, 321, 329, 331-334 are only commentaries
of St. Chrysostom (Gregory). Other MSS. are inserted instead.
</p>

<p>
309. (Act. 301.) (Greg. 242.)
</p>

<p>
310. Rom. Vat. Gr. 646 [xiv, Greg. xiii], 10-¾ × 7, ff. 250 ? (31), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>,
with commentary of Euthymius, Pars. i et ii. (Greg. 399.)
</p>

<p>
311. (Evan. 671.) (Greg. 400.)
</p>

<p>
312. Rom. Vat. Gr. 648 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1232], ff. 338, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, written at
Jerusalem by Simeon <q>qui et Saba dicitur.</q> (Greg. 401.)
</p>

<p>
313. (Act. 239.) (Greg. denies the <q>Paul.</q>)
</p>

<p>
314. Rom. Vat. Gr. 692 [xii, Greg. xi], 13-7/8 × 10, ff. 93, 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
Corinthians, Galatians, Ephesians, with commentary. (Greg. 402.)
</p>

<p>
315. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1222 [xvi], 12 × 8-1/8, ff. 437 (28), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., Rom., Heb., 1, 2 Cor., 1, 2 Tim., Eph., with Theophylact's
commentary. (Greg. 403.)
</p>

<p>
316. (Evan. 667.) (Greg. 267.)
</p>

<p>
317. (Evan. 673.) (Greg. 268.)
</p>

<p>
318. (Act. 319.)
</p>

<p>
319. (Act. 334.) (Greg. 431.)
</p>

<p>
320. (Act. 320.)
</p>

<p>
321. (Act. 186.) (Greg. 274.)
</p>

<p>
322. (Act. 256.) (Greg. 432.)
</p>

<p>
323. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2180 [xv], 11-5/8 × 8-¼, ff. 294 (36), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, with commentary of Theophylact. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 454.)
</p>

<p>
324. Rom. Vat. Alex. 4 [x], 12-7/8 × 10-3/8, ff. 256 (28), 2 cols., Romans
with commentary of Chrysostom. <q>Fuit monasterii dicti.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 480.)
</p>

<p>
325. (Evan. 698, Apoc. 117.) (Greg. 317.)
</p>

<p>
326. Rom. Vat. Ottob. 74 [xv], 12-¾ × 9, ff. 291 (29) ?, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, Romans,
with Theodoret's commentary. (Greg. 476<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
327. Rom. Vat. Pal. Gr. 10 [x], 13-1/8 × 9-½, ff. 268, <hi rend='italic'>proll.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ.,
<hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ., with a Patristic commentary, <q>Felkman adnotat.</q> (Greg. 406.)
</p>

<p>
328. Rom. Vat. Pal. Gr. 204 [x], 13-¼ × 9-3/8, ff. 181, with commentary
of Œcumenius. (Greg. 407.)
</p>

<p>
329. (Act. 335.) (Greg. 289.)
</p>

<p>
330. Rom. Vat. Pal. Gr. 423 [xii], 11-¾ × 9-½, ff. 2, Coloss. and Thessalon.,
with commentary. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 376<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
331. (Act. 304.) (Greg. 292.)
</p>

<p>
332. (Act. 305.) (Greg. 295.)
</p>

<p>
333. (Act. 306.) (Greg. 296.)
</p>

<p>
334. (Act. 301.) (Greg. 287.)
</p>

<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>

<p>
335. A theological treatise (Greg.). Instead&mdash;
(Act. 415.) (Greg. 297.)
</p>

<p>
336. (Act. 261) (Greg. 427.)
Instead of Cod. 337. (Greg.)
</p>

<p>
337. (Act. 264.) (Greg. 299.)
</p>

<p>
The next four MSS. are from the Abbé Martin's list.
</p>

<p>
338. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 1001 [xiv], 11-3/8 × 8-3/8, ff. 12 (31). Fragments
of Rom., 2 Tim., Col., Heb. (Greg. 376.)
</p>

<p>
339. Par. Nat. Coisl. Gr. 95 [xi], 13-7/8 × 10, ff. 348 (28), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, στίχ. (Greg. 380.)
</p>

<p>
340. Par. Nat. Coisl. Gr. 217 [xiii], 11 × 8-1/8, ff. 227 (52), <hi rend='italic'>proll.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, στίχ. (Greg. 381.)
</p>

<p>
341. (Evan. 38.) (Martin.) (Greg. 377.)
</p>

<p>
We now follow Dr. Gregory's order, only stating the MS. where there
is only his authority to rely upon, and referring students to his list for
the information which he has diligently gathered, often by personal
examination upon the spot.
</p>

<p>
342. (Evan. 1245.)
</p>

<p>
343. (Evan. 1246.)
</p>

<p>
344. (Evan. 1247.)
</p>

<p>
345. (Evan. 1248.)
</p>

<p>
346. (Evan. 1249.)
</p>

<p>
347. (Evan. 1250.)
</p>

<p>
348. (Evan. 1251.)
</p>

<p>
349. (Act. 149.)
</p>

<p>
350. Leyden, Univ. 66.
</p>

<p>
351. (Act. 307.)
</p>

<p>
352. (Act. 381.)
</p>

<p>
353. (Act. 382.)
</p>

<p>
354. (Act. 383.)
</p>

<p>
355. (Act. 384.)
</p>

<p>
356. (Act. 385.)
</p>

<p>
357. (Act. 386.)
</p>

<p>
358. (Act. 387.)
</p>

<p>
359. (Act. 388.)
</p>

<p>
360. (Act. 389.)
</p>

<p>
361. (Act. 390.)
</p>

<p>
362. (Act. 391.)
</p>

<p>
363. (Act. 392.)
</p>

<p>
364. (Act. 393.)
</p>

<p>
365. (Act. 394.)
</p>

<p>
366. (Act. 395.)
</p>

<p>
367. (Act. 399.)
</p>

<p>
368. (Act. 400.)
</p>

<p>
369. (Act. 403.)
</p>

<p>
370. (Act. 413.)
</p>

<p>
371. Madison, New Caesarea, America.
</p>

<p>
372. Lond. Brit. Mus. Arundel 534 [xiv], 10-¾ × 7, ff. 418 (31). With
Theophylact.
</p>

<p>
373. Vindobon. Caes. Gr. Theol. 157.
</p>

<p>
374. Besançon, City Libr. 200.
</p>

<p>
375. Par. Nat. Gr. 224 A.
</p>

<p>
376. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 1035.
</p>

<p>
377. Escurial ψ. ii. 20. (Greg. 376<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>c</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
378. Par. Nat. Coisl. Gr. 29.
</p>

<p>
379. Par. Nat. Coisl. Gr. 30.
</p>

<p>
380. (Evan. 1267.)
</p>

<p>
381. (Act. 330.)
</p>

<p>
382. Athens, Nat. 69 (100) [x], 10-5/8 x 7-1/8, ff. 377. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> beg. and end,
with commentary of Œcumenius and others: ff. 44 at beg. [xv].
</p>

<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>

<p>
383. Ath. Nat. 100 (96) [xiii], 12-1/8 x 8-5/8, ff. 319. First leaf perished.
</p>

<p>
384. Escurial χ. iv. 15.
</p>

<p>
385. Bologna, Univ. 2378.
</p>

<p>
386. Florence, Laur. vi. 8.
</p>

<p>
387. Flor. Laur. x. 9.
</p>

<p>
388. Flor. Laur. xi. 7.
</p>

<p>
389. Flor. Laur. Conv. Soppr. 21.
</p>

<p>
390. Milan, Ambr. A. 62 inf.
</p>

<p>
391. Milan, Ambr. C. (E ?) 295.
</p>

<p>
392. Milan, Ambr. D. 541 inf.
</p>

<p>
393. (Act. 309.) (Greg. 300.)
</p>

<p>
394. Naples, Nat. II. B. 23.
</p>

<p>
395. Naples, II. B. 24.
</p>

<p>
396. (Act. 418.) (Greg. 301.)
</p>

<p>
397. Rome, Casanatensis G. v. 7.
</p>

<p>
398. (Evan. 825.) (Greg. 308.)
</p>

<p>
399. (Evan. 757.) (Greg. 309.)
</p>

<p>
400. (Evan. 767.) (Greg. 310.)
</p>

<p>
401. (Evan. 794.) (Greg. 311.)
</p>

<p>
402. (Evan. 801.) (Greg. 313.)
</p>

<p>
403. (Evan. 808.) (Greg. 314.)
</p>

<p>
404. (Evan. 823.) (Greg. 315.)
</p>

<p>
405. Rom. Vat. Ottob. 17.
</p>

<p>
406. (Evan. 891.) (Greg. 318.)
</p>

<p>
407. (Evan. 922.) (Greg. 320.)
</p>

<p>
408. Venet. Marc. 36.
</p>

<p>
409. Athos, Coutloumoussi 90<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>.
</p>

<p>
410. Ath. Coutloum. 129.
</p>

<p>
411. Constantinople, Holy Sepulchre 2.
</p>

<p>
412. Constant. H. Sep. 3.
</p>

<p>
413. Patmos, St. John 61.
</p>

<p>
414. Patmos, St. John 62.
</p>

<p>
415. Patmos, St. John 63.
</p>

<p>
416. Patmos, St. John 116.
</p>

<p>
417. St. Saba, Tower 41.
</p>

<p>
418. Groningen, Univ. A. C. 1.
</p>

<p>
419. (Act. 311.)
</p>

<p>
420. (Act. 308.)
</p>

<p>
421. (Act. 312.)
</p>

<p>
422. (Act. 313.)
</p>

<p>
423. (Evan. 927.) (Greg. 321.)
</p>

<p>
424. (Evan. 935.) (Greg. 322.)
</p>

<p>
425. (Evan. 941.) (Greg. 323.)
</p>

<p>
426. (Evan. 945.) (Greg. 324.)
</p>

<p>
427. (Evan. 959.) (Greg. 325.)
</p>

<p>
428. (Evan. 1267.)
</p>

<p>
429. (Act. 323.) (Apoc. 127.)
</p>

<p>
430. (Evan. 986.) (Greg. 326.)
</p>

<p>
431. (Evan. 996.) (Greg. 327.)
</p>

<p>
432. (Evan. 997.) (Greg. 328.)
</p>

<p>
433. (Evan. 999.) (Greg. 329.)
</p>

<p>
434. (Act. 332.)
</p>

<p>
435. (Act. 333.)
</p>

<p>
436. (Evan. 1003.) (Greg. 330.)
</p>

<p>
437. (Evan. 1040.) (Greg. 331.)
</p>

<p>
438. (Act. 344.)
</p>

<p>
439. (Act. 346.)
</p>

<p>
440. (Act. 347.)
</p>

<p>
441. (Act. 348.)
</p>

<p>
442. (Act. 349.)
</p>

<p>
443. (Act. 350.)
</p>

<p>
444. (Act. 351.)
</p>

<p>
445. (Act. 352.)
</p>

<p>
446. (Act. 353.)
</p>

<p>
447. (Act. 354.)
</p>

<p>
448. (Act. 355.)
</p>

<p>
449. (Act. 356.)
</p>

<p>
450. (Act. 357.)
</p>

<p>
451. (Act. 358.)
</p>

<p>
452. (Act. 359.)
</p>

<p>
453. (Act. 360.)
</p>

<p>
454. (Act. 361.)
</p>

<p>
455. (Act. 362.)
</p>

<p>
456. (Act. 366.)
</p>

<p>
457. (Act. 368.)
</p>

<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>

<p>
458. (Act. 369.)
</p>

<p>
459. (Act. 370.)
</p>

<p>
460. (Act. 371.)
</p>

<p>
461. (Act. 372.)
</p>

<p>
462. (Act. 373.)
</p>

<p>
463. (Act. 374.)
</p>

<p>
464. (Act. 375.)
</p>

<p>
465. (Act. 376.)
</p>

<p>
466. (Act. 377.)
</p>

<p>
467. (Act. 378.)
</p>

<p>
468. (Act. 379.)
</p>

<p>
469. (Act. 307.)
</p>

<p>
470. Escurial τ. iii. 17.
</p>

<p>
471. Athens, Nat. (259) ?
</p>

<p>
472. (Evan. 1058.) (Greg. 332.)
</p>

<p>
473. (Act. 205.)
</p>

<p>
474. (Act. 315.)
</p>

<p>
475. (Act. 209.)
</p>

<p>
476. (Evan. 1072.) (Greg. 333.)
</p>

<p>
477. (Act. 232.)
</p>

<p>
478. (Evan. 1075.) (Greg. 334.)
</p>

<p>
479. (Act. 195.)
</p>

<p>
480. (Evan. 1094.) (Greg. 335.)
</p>

<p>
481. (Evan. 1240.) (Greg. 337.)
</p>

<p>
482. (Evan. 1241.) (Greg. 338.)
</p>

<p>
483. (Evan. 1242.) (Greg. 339.)
</p>

<p>
484. (Evan. 1243.) (Greg. 340.)
</p>

<p>
485. (Evan. 1244.) (Greg. 341.)
</p>

<p>
486. (Act. 303.)
</p>

<p>
487. (Act. 419.)
</p>

<p>
488. (Act. 420.)
</p>

<p>
489. (Act. 325.)
</p>

<p>
490. Dublin, Trin. Coll. D. i. 28 [xiv], 8-½ × 5-½, ff. 8, Rom. viii. 23
(ἑαυτούς) ... xiv. 10 κρι | νεις. Inked over in places by another hand
[xvi]. Κεφ. Collated by Dr. T. K. Abbott (<hi rend='italic'>Hermathena</hi>, xviii. 233,
1892).
</p>

<p>
491. (Act. 107.)
</p>

</div>

<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XII. Cursive Manuscripts Of The Apocalypse.</head>

<p>
1. Mayhingen, Oettingen-Wallerstein [xii], 9-1/8 × 5-7/8, ff. 90 (15 last
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>), the only one used in 1516 by Erasmus (who calls it <q>exemplar
vetustissimum</q>) and long lost, contains the commentary of Andreas of
Caesarea, in which the text is so completely imbedded that great care is
needed to separate the one from the other. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> ch. xxii. 16-21,
ending with τοῦ <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>δαδ</hi>. This manuscript was happily re-discovered in
1861 by Professor F. Delitzsch at Mayhingen in Bavaria in the library
of the Prince of Oettingen-Wallerstein, and a critical account of it
published by him (illustrated by a facsimile) in the first part of his
<q>Handschriftliche Funde</q> (1861). Tregelles also, in the second part
of the same work, published an independent collation of his own (with
valuable 'Notes' prefixed), which he had made at Erlangen in 1862.
The identity of Apoc. 1 with the recovered copy is manifest from such
<foreign rend='italic'>monstra</foreign> as ἐβάπτισας ch. ii. 3, which is found in both; from the reading
συνάγει ch. xiii. 10, and from the clauses put wrong by Erasmus, as
being lost in the commentary, e.g. ch. ii. 17; iii. 5, 12, 15; vi. 11, 15.
Of this copy Dr. Hort says (Introd. p. 263) that <q>it is by no means an
average cursive of the common sort. On the one hand it has many
individualisms and readings with small and evidently unimportant attestation:
on the other it has a large and good ancient element,... and
ought certainly (with the somewhat similar 38) to stand high among
secondary documents.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. (Act. 10, Stephen's ιε᾽.)
</p>

<p>
3. Codex Stephani ιϛ᾽, unknown; cited only 77 times throughout the
Apocalypse in Stephen's edition of 1550, and that very irregularly; only
once (ch. xx. 3) after ch. xvii. 8. It was not one of the copies in the
King's Library, and the four citations noticed by Mill (N. T., <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi> § 1176)
from Luke xxii. 30; 67; 2 Cor. xii. 11; 1 Tim. iii. 3, are probably mere
errors of Stephen's press.
</p>

<p>
4. (Act. 12.)
</p>

<p>
5. Codices Laurentii Vallae (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 82); the readings of which
Erasmus used.
</p>

<p>
Codd. 6, 26, 27, 28 were rather loosely collated for Wetstein by his
kinsman Caspar Wetstein, chaplain to Frederick, Prince of Wales.
</p>

<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>

<p>
6. (Act. 23.)
</p>

<p>
*7. (Act. 25, l<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
*8. (Act. 28, d<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
9. (Act. 30.)
</p>

<p>
10. (Evan. 60.)
</p>

<p>
11. (Act. 39.)
</p>

<p>
12. (Act. 40.)
</p>

<p>
*13. (Act. 42.)
</p>

<p>
*14. (Evan. 69, f<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>.)<note place='foot'>Mr. B. W. Newton superintended the publication of Tregelles' last part of
his Greek New Testament under circumstances which disarm criticism, but
Tregelles could hardly have meant that in the Apocalypse <q>much of Cod. 14
(Leicestrensis) has been supplied by a later hand from the Codex Montfortianus,
Apoc. 92</q> (Introductory Notice, p. 1). The original hand remains unchanged
in the Leicester copy, even on the last torn leaf containing portions of Apoc. xix,
but the converse supposition is very maintainable, though not quite certain,
that the Apocalypse in Cod. 92 was transcribed from Cod. 14.</note>
</p>

<p>
15. Fragments of ch. iii, iv, annexed to Cod. E Evan. in a later hand.
</p>

<p>
16. (Act. 45.)
</p>

<p>
17. (Evan. 35.)
</p>

<p>
18. (Act. 18.)
</p>

<p>
19. (Act. 17.)
</p>

<p>
20. (Evan. 175), a few extracts made by Bianchini: so Apoc. 24.
</p>

<p>
21, 22 of Wetstein were two unknown French codices, cited by Bentley
in his specimen of Apoc. xxii, and made Wetstein's 23 (Act. 56).
Scholz, discarding these three as doubtful, substitutes&mdash;
</p>

<p>
21. Rom. Vallicell. D. 20 [xiv, Greg. xv], 12-7/8 × 8-½, ff. 93 (28), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
</p>

<p>
22. (Act. 166.)
</p>

<p>
23. (Evan. 367.)<note place='foot'>Gregory has substituted this for Scholz's 23, which he finds does not contain
Apoc. Whatever readings he cites under these three numbers, are simply
copied from Wetstein (Kelly's <q>Revelation,</q> Introd. p. xi, note). Dr. Gregory
has seen all the four.</note>
</p>

<p>
24. (Act. 160.)
</p>

<p>
25. (Evan. 149.)
</p>

<p>
*26. (Evan. 492.)
</p>

<p>
27. (Evan. 503.)
</p>

<p>
*28. Oxf. Bodl. Bar. 48 [xv], 8 × 5-½, ff. 24 (22), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ.,
contains mixed matter by several hands, and is n<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> of the Apocalypse,
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> ch. xvii. 5-xxii. 21 (ch. v. 1-5 is repeated in the volume in a
different hand). This is an important copy, akin to Apocc. 7 and 96.
Bentley also named it κ in his collation extant in the margin of Trin.
Coll. B. xvii. 5 (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 51).
</p>

<p>
*29. (Act. 60, e<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
30. (Act. 69.)
</p>

<p>
*31. Lond. Brit. Mus. Harl. 5678 [xv], 11-¼ x 8-½, ff. 244 (24), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, is c<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>, but ch. i-viii had been loosely collated for Griesbach by
Paulus. Like Evan. 445 it once belonged to the Jesuits' College at Agen,
and is important for its readings. Has much miscellaneous matter.
</p>

<p>
32. Dresdensis, Reg. A. 124 [xv, Griesb. x], 7-¾ × 4-¾, ff. 16, belonged
to Loescher, then to Brühl, collated by Dassdorf and Matthaei (Mt. t).
The close resemblance in the text of Apocc. 29-32 is somewhat overstated
by Griesbach.
</p>

<p>
*33. (Evan. 218.)
</p>

<p>
34. (Act. 66.)
</p>

<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>

<p>
35. Vindob. Caes. Gr. Theol. 307 [xiv], 7-1/8 × 5-5/8, ff. 32 (20), with Andreas'
commentary: brought from Constantinople by de Busbeck (Alter).
Described by Delitzsch, Handschriftliche Funde (part ii), p. 41 (1862).
In text it closely resembles Cod. 87.
</p>

<p>
36. Vindob. Caes. Suppl. Gr. 93 [xiv, Greg. xiii], 6-3/8 × 4-3/8, ff. 56 (36),
<hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., ends ch. xix. 20, with Andreas' commentary: the text
is in στίχοι (Alter), having much in common with Codd. א, 7.
</p>

<p>
37. (Act. 72.)
</p>

<p>
*38. Rom. Vat. Gr. 579 [xiii, Greg. xv], 8-3/8 × 5-¼, ff. 24 (30), on cotton
paper, in the midst of foreign matter. The text (together with some
marginal readings) (<foreign rend='italic'>primâ manu</foreign>) closely resembles that of Codd. AC,
and was collated by Birch, inspected by Scholz and Tregelles, and
subsequently recollated by B. H. Alford at the request of Tregelles (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi>
Evan. T).
</p>

<p>
39. (Paul. 85.)
</p>

<p>
40. (Evan. 141.)
</p>

<p>
41. Rom. Vat. Reg. Gr. 68 [xiv, Greg. xv], 9-1/8 × 6, ff. 70 (14), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>proll.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, with extracts from Œcumenius and Andreas' commentary
(Birch, Scholz: so Apoc. 43).
</p>

<p>
42. (Act. 80.)
</p>

<p>
43. Rom. Barberini iv. 56 [xiv], 9-¾ × 7, ff. 5 (58) at end, 2 cols., contains
ch. xiv. 17-xviii. 20, with a commentary, together with portions of the
Septuagint.
</p>

<p>
44. (Evan. 180.)
</p>

<p>
45. (Act. 89.)
</p>

<p>
46. (Evan. 209.)
</p>

<p>
*47. (Evan. 241.)
</p>

<p>
*48. (Evan. 242.)
</p>

<p>
*49. Moscow, Synod. 67 (Mt. o) [xv], fol., ff. 58, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, with Andreas'
commentary, and Gregory Nazianzen's Homilies.
</p>

<p>
*50. Mosc. Synod. 206 (Mt. p) [xv], fol. <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, ff. 35, like Evann. 69,
206, 233, is partly of parchment, partly paper, from the Iberian monastery
on Athos; it also contains lives of the Saints.
</p>

<p>
*50<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>. Also from the Iberian monastery [x], is Matthaei's r, Tischendorf's
90.
</p>

<p>
Apocc. 51-84 were added to the list by Scholz, of which he professes to
have collated Cod. 51 entirely, as Reiche has done after him; 68, 69, 82
nearly entire; twenty-one others cursorily, the rest (apparently) not at
all. Our 87 is Scrivener's m, collated in the Apocalypse only.
</p>

<p>
*51. (Evan. 18.)
</p>

<p>
52. (Act. 51.)
</p>

<p>
53. (Act. 116.)
</p>

<p>
54. (Evan. 263.)
</p>

<p>
55. (Act. 118.)
</p>

<p>
56. (Act. 119.)
</p>

<p>
57. (Act. 124.)
</p>

<p>
58. Par. Nat. Gr. 19, once Colbert's [xvi], 7-7/8 × 5-¾, ff. 36 (22), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>,
with <q>Hiob et Justini cohort. ad Graec.</q> Scholz.
</p>

<p>
59. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 99<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi> [xvi], 8-1/8 × 5-5/8, ff. 83, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, with a
commentary. Once Giles de Noailles'.
</p>

<p>
60. Rom. Vat. Gr. 656 [xiii or xiv], 6-¾ × 4-5/8, ff. 207 (17), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, with
Andreas'. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Gregory 79.)
</p>

<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>

<p>
61. Par. Nat. Gr. 491, once Colbert's [xiii], 9-½ × 6-1/8, ff. 13, on cotton
paper, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, with extracts from Basil, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
62. Par. Nat. Gr. 239 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1422], 8-5/8 × 5-5/8, ff. 119 (26), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, with
Andreas' commentary.
</p>

<p>
63. Par. Nat. Gr. 241 [xvi], 8-1/8 × 5-7/8, ff. 294, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, with Andreas'
commentary. Once de Thou's, then Colbert's.
</p>

<p>
64. (Paul. 159.)
</p>

<p>
65. Moscow, Univ. Libr. 25 [xii], 4to, ff. 7 (once Coislin's 229),
contains ch. xvi. 20-xxii. 21.
</p>

<p>
66. (Act. 419.)
</p>

<p>
67. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1743 [dated December 5, 1302], 8-7/8 × 6-½, ff. ?,
κεφ., τίτλ., with Andreas' commentary.
</p>

<p>
68. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1904, vol. 2 [xi], 11-¼ × 8-1/8, ff. 19, contains ch. vii,
17-viii. 12; xx. 1-xxii. 21, with Arethas' commentary, and much
foreign matter. This fragment (as also Apoc. 72 according to Scholz,
who however never cites it) agrees much with Cod. A.
</p>

<p>
69. (Act. 161.)
</p>

<p>
70. (Evan. 386.)
</p>

<p>
71. Athens, Nat. Libr. 142 [xv], 5-7/8 × 4-3/8, ff. 233, with other matter.
</p>

<p>
*72. Rom. Ghigianus R. iv. 8 [xvi], 8-1/8 × 5-¼, ff. ?, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, with Andreas'
commentary. Collated hastily by the late W. H. Simcox.
</p>

<p>
73. Rom. Corsin. 41. E. 37 [xv or xvi], 7-5/8 × 4-7/8, ff. 97 (30), κεφ., τίτλ.
(<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Gregory.)
</p>

<p>
74. (Act. 140.)
</p>

<p>
75. (Act. 86.)
</p>

<p>
76. (Act. 421.)
</p>

<p>
77. Florence, Laur. vii. 9 [xv, Greg. xvi], 8-3/8 × 5-½, ff. 363 (25), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>,
with Arethas' commentary.
</p>

<p>
78. (Paul. 197.)
</p>

<p>
*79. Munich, Reg. Gr. 248 [xvi], 9-1/8 × 6-¼, ff. 84 (28), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ.,
τίτλ.; once Sirlet's, the Apostolic chief notary (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 373 and Evst.
132), with Andreas' commentary, whose text it follows. That excellent
and modest scholar Fred. Sylburg collated it for his edition of Andreas,
1596, one of the last labours of his diligent life. An excellent copy.
</p>

<p>
80. Monac. Reg. Gr. 544 (Bengel's Augustan. 7) [xii Sylburg, xiv Scholz,
who adds that it once belonged to the Emperor Manuel Palaeologus,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1400], 8 × 5-¾, ff. 169 (20), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., on cotton paper, with
Andreas' commentary.
</p>

<p>
81. Monac. Reg. Gr. 23 [xvi], 14 × 9-¼, ff. 83 (30), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., with
works of Gregory Nyssen, and Andreas' commentary, used by Theod.
Peltanus for his edition of Andreas, Ingoldstadt, 1547. Peltanus'
marginal notes from this copy were seen by Scholz.
</p>

<p>
82. (Act. 179.)
</p>

<p>
83. (Evan. 339): much like Apoc. B.
</p>

<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>

<p>
84. (Evan. 368.)<note place='foot'>After this again we withdraw Scholz's copies, as virtually included in Coxe's,
putting others in their room. They are 85. (Act. 184.) 86. (Evan. 462),
thrice cited ineunte libro (Tischendorf). 86<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> of Scholz, being 89 of Tischendorf
(Evan. 466).</note>
</p>

<p>
85. Escurial ψ. iii. 17 [xii], <q>con commentarios Cl. Pablo</q> (Haenel
and Montana).
</p>

<p>
86. (Act. 251.) (Greg. 122.)
</p>

<p>
*87. (Act. 178), m<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. See Apoc. 35.
</p>

<p>
88. (Evan. 205.)
</p>

<p>
*89. (Paul. 266.) B.-C. II. 4. (Greg. 108.)
</p>

<p>
*90. Dresd. Reg. A. 95 [x Griesb., Scholz xv], 12-¼ × 9, ff. 16 (30),
2 cols. This is 50<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> Scholz (Mt. r).
</p>

<p>
*91. (Paul. 263.) Rom. Vat. Gr. 1209 [xv], 10-5/8 × 10-3/8, ff. ?. Mico's
collation of the modern supplement to the great Cod. B, made for
Bentley, and published in Ford's <q>Appendix</q> to the Codex Alexandrinus,
1799. The whole supplement from Heb. ix. 14 ριεῖ τὴν συνείδησιν
including the Apocalypse (but not the Pastoral Epistles) is printed at
full length in Vercellone and Cozza's edition of Cod. Vaticanus (1868).
</p>

<p>
92. (Evan. 61.) Published by Dr. Barrett, 1801, in his Appendix to
Evan. Z, but suspected to be a later addition. See Apoc. 14, note.
</p>

<p>
Wm. Kelly, <q>The Revelation of John edited in Greek with a new
English Version,</q> 1860, thus numbers Scrivener's collations of six copies
not included in the foregoing catalogue&mdash;
</p>

<p>
*93. (Paul. 256 or e<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>), a<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>.
</p>

<p>
*94. (Evan. 201), b<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>.
</p>

<p>
*95. Parham 82. 17, g<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> [xii], 10-¼ × 7-¾, brought by the late Lord
de la Zouche in 1837 from Caracalla on Athos: it contains an epitome of
the commentary of Arethas, in a cramped hand much less distinct than
the text, which ends at ch. xx. 11. There are no divisions into chapters.
This <q>special treasure,</q> as Tregelles calls it, was regarded by him and
Alford as one of the best cursive manuscripts of the Apocalypse:
Dr. Hort judges it inferior to none. It agrees with Cod. A alone or
nearly so in ch. xviii. 8, 10, (19), 23; xix. 14: compare also its readings
in ch. xix. 6 (bis), 12.
</p>

<p>
*96. Parham 67 (?). 2, h<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> [xiv], 11-1/8 × 7-5/8, ff. 22 (28), κεφ., on glazed
paper, very neat, also from Caracalla, complete and in excellent preservation,
with very short scholia here and there. These two manuscripts
were collated by Scrivener in 1855, under the hospitable roof of their
owner.
</p>

<p>
*97. (Evan. 584.) Brit. Mus. Add. 17,469, j<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> [xiv], collated only in
Apoc.
</p>

<p>
*98. (Evan. 488.) Oxf. Bodl. Can. 34, k<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> [dated in the Apocalypse
July 18, 1516]. The Pauline Epistles [dated Oct. 11, 1515] precede the
Acts. Collated only in Apoc.
</p>

<p>
99. (Act. 83 ?) (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg.) Cited, like the next, by Tischendorf.
</p>

<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>

<p>
100. Naples, Nat. II. Aa. 10 ? [xiv or xv], 10-¼ × 7-3/8. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg.)
</p>

<p>
101. (Evan. 206.)
</p>

<p>
102. (Evan. 451.) (Greg. 103.)
</p>

<p>
103. Petersburg, Muralt. 129 [xv], 4to, ff. 25 (35), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>
</p>

<p>
104. (Evan. 531.) (Greg. 107.)
</p>

<p>
105. (Act. 301.) (Greg. 104.)
</p>

<p>
106. (Evan. 605.)
</p>

<p>
107. (Act. 232.) (Greg. 181.)
</p>

<p>
108. (Act. 236.)
</p>

<p>
109<note place='foot'>We cannot identify 109, Bentley's R (Regis Galliae, 1872): cf. Ellis, Bentleii
Critica Sacra, Intr. p. xxix.</note>. (Act. 240.) (Greg. 102.)
</p>

<p>
110. (Evan. 622.) (Greg. 113.)
</p>

<p>
111. (Act. 307.) (Greg. 105.)
</p>

<p>
112. Dresden, Reg. 187 [xvi], 8 × 6, ff. 21 (26). With Andreas.
(<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 182.)
</p>

<p>
113. Messina, Univ. 99 [xiii], 10-5/8 × 8-3/8, ff. 138 (24), 2 cols., with
commentary. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 146.)
</p>

<p>
114. Rom. Vat. Gr. 542 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1331], 11 × 8-¼, ff. 105 (29). With
Andreas and Homm. of Chrysostom. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 153.)
</p>

<p>
115. (Evan. 866.) (Greg. 114.)
</p>

<p>
116. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1976 [xvii, Greg. xvi], 8-3/8 × 5-5/8, ff. 114 (20),
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, κεφ., τίτλ., with commentary of Andreas. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 157.)
</p>

<p>
117. (Evan. 698, Paul. 324.) (Greg. 115.)
</p>

<p>
118. Rom. Vat. Ottob. Gr. 283 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1574, a Jo. Euripioto], 8-3/8 × 5-7/8,
ff. 123 (22), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, κεφ., Andreas. (Greg. 160.)
</p>

<p>
119. Rom. Vat. Pal. Gr. 346 [xv], 14-3/8 × 10, ff. 86 (30), <hi rend='italic'>prol.</hi>, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., Andreas, (See Greg. 161.)
</p>

<p>
120. Rom. Angelic. A. 4. 1 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1447], 8-½ × 5-½, ff. 86 (29), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>,
κεφ., τίτλ., Andreas. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 149.)
</p>

<p>
121. Rom. Angelic. B: 5. 15 [xv], 8-1/8 × 5-¾, ff. ?, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, much liturgical
information. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 150.)
</p>

<p>
122. Rom. Ghig. R. V. 33 [xiv], 10 × 7-¼, ff. 28 (32), much theological
writing, collated by W. H. Simcox, ff. 347, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> Andreas and
Œcumenius. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 151.)
</p>

<p>
123. (Evan. 738.)
</p>

<p>
124. (Act. 309.)
</p>

<p>
125. (Act. 207.)
</p>

<p>
126. (Act. 208.)
</p>

<p>
127. (Act. 323.)
</p>

<p>
128. (Act. 332.)
</p>

<p>
129. (Act. 238.)
</p>

<p>
130. (Act. 359.)
</p>

<p>
131. (Act. 362.)
</p>

<p>
132. (Act. 374.)
</p>

<p>
133. (Act. 384.)
</p>

<p>
134. (Act. 386.)
</p>

<p>
135. (Act. 399.)
</p>

<p>
136. Vindob. Caes. Gr. Theol. 69.
</p>

<p>
137. Vind. Caes. Theol. 163.
</p>

<p>
138. Vind. Caes. Gr. Theol. 220.
</p>

<p>
139. Par. Nat. Gr. 240.
</p>

<p>
140. Par. Nat. Coisl. Gr. 256.
</p>

<p>
141. Athens, bibl. τῆς Βουλῆς.
</p>

<p>
142. (Paul. 202.)
</p>

<p>
143. Escurial χ. iii. 6.
</p>

<p>
144. Madrid. <hi rend='smallcaps'>o</hi>. 19 (7).
</p>

<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>

<p>
145. Florence, Laur. vii. 29.
</p>

<p>
146. (Evan. 757.) (Greg. 110.)
</p>

<p>
147. Modena, Este iii. E. 1.
</p>

<p>
148. Modena, Este iii. F. 12.
</p>

<p>
149. (Evan. 792.) (Greg. 111.)
</p>

<p>
150. (Evan. 808.) (Greg. 112.)
</p>

<p>
151. (Evan. 922.) (Greg. 116.)
</p>

<p>
152. Rom. Vat. Gr. 370.
</p>

<p>
153. (Evan. 1262.)
</p>

<p>
154. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1190.
</p>

<p>
155. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1426 (Act. 264.) (Greg. 121.)
</p>

<p>
156. (Act. 159.)
</p>

<p>
157. (Evan. 986.) (Greg. 117.)
</p>

<p>
158. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2129. (Cf. Evst. 389.)
</p>

<p>
159. Rom. Vat. Ottob Gr. 154.
</p>

<p>
160. (Evan. 1072.) (Greg. 118.)
</p>

<p>
161. (Evan. 1075.) (Greg. 119.)
</p>

<p>
162. Venice, Mark i. 40.
</p>

<p>
163. Ven. Mark ii. 54.
</p>

<p>
164. Athos, Anna 11.
</p>

<p>
165. Athos, Vatopedi 90.
</p>

<p>
166. Athos, Vatop. 90 (2).
</p>

<p>
167. Athos, Dionysius 163. (Cf. Evst. 642.)
</p>

<p>
168. Athos, Docheiariou 81.
</p>

<p>
169. Athos, Iveron 34.
</p>

<p>
170. Athos, Iveron 379.
</p>

<p>
171. Athos, Iveron 546.
</p>

<p>
172. Athos, Iveron 594.
</p>

<p>
173. Athos, Iveron 605.
</p>

<p>
174. Athos, Iveron 644.
</p>

<p>
175. Athos, Iveron 661.
</p>

<p>
176. Athos, Constamonitou 29.
</p>

<p>
177. Athos, Constam. 107.
</p>

<p>
178. Patmos, St. John 12.
</p>

<p>
179. Patmos, St. John 64.
</p>

<p>
180. (Act. 149.)
</p>

<p>
181. (Act. 417.)
</p>

<p>
182. (Evan. 1094.) (Greg. 120.)
</p>

<p>
183. Thessalonica, Ἑλληνικὸν Γυμνάσιον 10. (Cf. Apost. 163.)
</p>

<p>
184. (Act. 422.)
</p>

</div>

<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XIII. Evangelistaries, Or Manuscript Service-Books Of The
Gospels.</head>

<p>
However grievously the great mass of cursive manuscripts
of the New Testament has been neglected by Biblical
critics, the Lectionaries of the Greek Church, partly for causes
previously stated, have received even less attention at their
hands. Yet no sound reason can be alleged for regarding the
testimony of these Service-books as of slighter value than that
of other witnesses of the same date and character. The necessary
changes interpolated in the text at the commencement and
sometimes at the end of lessons are so simple and obvious that
the least experienced student can make allowance for them<note place='foot'>In the sixth lesson for the Holy Passions the prefatory clause to Mark xv.
16 is founded on an obvious misconception: Τῷ καιρῷ ἐκείνῳ οἱ στρατιῶται ἀπήγαγον
τὸν ϊν εἰς τὴν ἀυλὴν τοῦ καϊάφα, ὅ ἐστι πραιτώριον. We remember no similar
instance of error.</note>:
and if the same passage is often given in a different form when
repeated in the same Lectionary, although the fact ought to be
recorded and borne in mind, this occasional inconsistency must
no more militate against the reception of the general evidence of
the copy that exhibits it, than it excludes from our roll of critical
authorities the works of Origen and other Fathers, in which the
selfsame variation is even more the rule than the exception.
Dividing, therefore, the Lectionaries that have been hitherto
catalogued (which form indeed but a small portion of those
known to exist in Eastern monasteries and Western libraries)
into Evangelistaria, or Evangeliaria, containing extracts from
the Gospels, and Praxapostoli or Apostoli comprising extracts
from the Acts and Epistles; we purpose to mark with an asterisk
the few that have been really collated, including them in the
same list with the majority which have been examined superficially,
or not at all. Uncial copies (some as late as the eleventh
<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>
century) will be distinguished by [+]. The uncial codices of the
Gospels amount to one hundred and six, those of the Acts and
Epistles only to seven or eight, but probably to more in either
case, since all is not known about some of the Codd. recorded
here. Lectionaries are usually (yet see below, Evst. 111, 142,
178, 244, 249, 255, 256, 262, 266, 268, 275, Apost. 52, 69) written
with two columns on a page, like the Codex Alexandrinus, FGI
(1-6, 7) LMN<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>PQRTUXΘ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>Λ, 8, 184, 207, 360, 418, 422, 463, 509
of the Gospels, and Cod. M of St. Paul's Epistles.
</p>

<p>
[+]1. Par. Nat. Gr. 278 [x ? Omont xiv], 11-7/8 × 9-½, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, ff. 265,
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> (Wetstein, Scholz).
</p>

<p>
[+]2. Par. Nat. Gr. 280 [ix, Greg. x], 11-¼ × 8-½, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, ff. 257 (18),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> (Wetstein, Scholz).
</p>

<p>
[+]3. Oxf. Lincoln Coll. Gr. ii. 15 [x, Greg. xi], 11-¼ × 9, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, ff. 282 (19),
<hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, with coloured and gilt illuminations and capitals, and
red crosses for stops: three leaves are lost near the end (Mill).
</p>

<p>
4. Cambr. Univ. Libr. Dd. 8. 49, or Moore 2 [xi], 10-¾ × 8-½, ff. 199
(24), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi> (Mill).
</p>

<p>
[+]5. Oxf. Bodl. Barocc. 202 [x], 12 × 9, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, ff. 150 (19), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi>, ends at Matt. xxiii. 4, being the middle of the Lesson for Tuesday
in Holy Week (Burgon). <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> initio (Mill, Wetstein). This is Bentley's
α in Trin. Coll. B. xvii. 5 marg. (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 51).
</p>

<p>
*[+]6. (Apost. 1.) Leyden, Univ. Scaliger's 243 [xi ?], 7-5/8 × 5-¼, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>,
ff. 278 (18), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, with an Arabic version, contains the Praxapostolos,
Psalms, and but a few Lessons from the Gospels (Wetstein,
Dermout).
</p>

<p>
7. Par. Nat. Gr. 301 [written by George, a priest, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1205], 12 × 9-1/8,
ff. 316 (23), 2 cols. (Evst. 7-12, 14-17, were slightly collated by
Wetstein, Scholz.)
</p>

<p>
8. Par. Nat. Gr. 312 [xiv], 13-½ × 11, ff. 309 (29), 2 cols., written by
Cosmas, a monk.
</p>

<p>
9. Par. Nat. Gr. 307 [xiii], 11-¾ × 9-½, ff. 260 (24), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>
</p>

<p>
10. Par. Nat. Gr. 287 [xi, Greg. xiii], 12-5/8 × 9-5/8, ff. 142 (23), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
</p>

<p>
11. Par. Nat. Gr. 309 [xiii], 11-¾ × 9, ff. 142, 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
</p>

<p>
12. Par. Nat. Gr. 310 [xiii], 12 × 9, ff. 366 (24), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
</p>

<p>
[+]13. Par. Nat. Coisl. Gr. 31 [x, Greg. xi], 14-½ × 10-¼, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, ff. 283 (18),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. aur.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, most beautifully written, the first seven pages in
gold, the next fifteen in vermilion, the rest in black ink, described by
Montfaucon (Scholz). Wetstein's 13 (Colbert. 1241 or Reg. 1982) contains
no Evangelistarium.
</p>

<p>
14. Par. Nat. Gr. 315 [xv, Greg. xvi], 10-5/8 × 7-½, ff. 348 (22), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> Wrongly set down as Evan. 322.
</p>

<p>
15. Par. Nat. Gr. 302 [xiii], 10 × 7-½, ff. 310 (22), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
</p>

<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>

<p>
16. Par. Nat. Gr. 297 [xii], 10-5/8 × 8-½, ff. 199 (19), 2 cols., much <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
</p>

<p>
[+]17. Par. Nat. Gr. 279 [xii, Greg. ix], 10-¼ × 7-3/8, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, ff. 199 (19),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> (Tischendorf seems to have confounded 13 and 17 in his
N. T., Proleg. p. ccxvi, 7th edition.)
</p>

<p>
18. Oxf. Bodl. Laud. Gr. 32 [xii], 11-½ × 9-½, ff. 276 (22), 2 cols., much
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, beginning John iv. 53. Codd. 18-22 were partially examined by
Griesbach after Mill.
</p>

<p>
19. Oxf. Bodl. Misc. Gr. 10 [xiii], 12-¼ × 8-¾, ff. 332 (24), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, given in 1661 by Parthenius, Patriarch of Constantinople,
to Heneage Finch, Earl of Winchelsea, our Ambassador there. This and
Cod. 18 are said by Mill to be much like Stephen's ϛ', Evan. 7.
</p>

<p>
20. Oxf. Bodl. Laud. Gr. 34 [written by Onesimus, April, 1047,
Indiction 15], 11-½ × 9-½, ff. 177 (22), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi><note place='foot'>Laud. Gr. 36, which in the Bodleian Catalogue is described as an Evangelistarium,
is a collection of Church Lessons from the Septuagint read in Lent and
the Holy Week, such as we described above. It has red musical notes, and
seems <emph>once</emph> to have borne the date <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1028. It is Dean Holmes' No. 61 (Praef.
ad Pentateuch).</note>
</p>

<p>
21. Oxf. Bodl. Seld. B. 56 [xiv], 9-½ × 7-¼, ff. 59 (28), 2 cols., a fragment
containing Lessons in Lent till Easter, coarsely written.
</p>

<p>
22. Oxf. Bodl. Seld. B. 54 [xiv], 10-¼ × 8, ff. 63 (25), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>,
a fragment, with Patristic homilies [xi].
</p>

<p>
[+]23. <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, Mead's, then Askew's, then D'Eon's, by whom it was sent
to France. Wetstein merely saw it. Not now known.
</p>

<p>
[+]24. Munich, Reg. Gr. 383 [x], 12-½ × 9-½ ff. 265 (21), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, the Lessons for Saturdays and Sundays (σαββατοκυριακαί: <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evst.
110, 157, 186, 221, 227, 283, 289), <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> (Bengel, Scholz). Is this Cod.
Radzivil, with slightly sloping uncials [viii], of which Silvestre gives
a facsimile (Paléogr. Univ., ii. 61) ?
</p>

<p>
25. Lond. Brit. Mus. Harl. 5650 [xii], 9-¼ × 6, ff. 267 (22), a palimpsest,
whose later writing is by Nicephorus the reader. The older writing,
now illegible, was partly uncial, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
</p>

<p>
25<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi> represents a few Lessons in the same codex by a later, yet contemporary
hand (Bloomfield).
</p>

<p>
Evst. 25-30 were very partially collated by Griesbach.
</p>

<p>
[+]26. (Apost. 28.) Oxf. Bodl. Seld. supra (1) 2 [xiii], 8 × 5-¾, ff. 180,
mut., a palimpsest, but the earlier uncial writing is illegible, and the
codex in a wretched state, the work of several hands.
</p>

<p>
[+]27. Oxf. Bodl. 3391, Seld. supra (2) 3, a palimpsest [ix uncial,
xiv later writing], 9 × 6-¾, ff. 150 (89-95 cursive), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, in large
ill-formed characters.
</p>

<p>
Evst. 26, 27 were collated by Mangey, 1749, but his papers appear
to be lost.
</p>

<p>
28. Oxf. Bodl. Misc. Gr. 11 [xiii], 9-¾ × 7-½, ff. 203 (21), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at end and on June 14, in two careless hands.
</p>

<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>

<p>
29. Oxf. Bodl. Misc. Gr. 12 [xii or xiii], 10 × 8, ff. 156 (23), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> Elegantly written, but much worn.
</p>

<p>
30. (Apost. 265.) Oxf. Bodl. Cromw. 11 [the whole written in 1225
by Michael, a χωρικὸς καλλιγράφος], 8 × 6, ff. 208. After Liturgies of
Chrys., Basil, Praesanctified, εὐαγγέλια ἀναστάσιμα, Evst. (p. 290) and
Apost. (p. 149), i.e. lections from Epistles and Gospels for great feasts.
</p>

<p>
31. Norimberg. [xii], 4to, ff. 281 (Doederlein). Its readings are stated
by Michaelis to resemble those of Codd. D (e.g. Luke xxii. 4), L, 1, 69.
</p>

<p>
*32. Gotha, Ducal Libr. MS. 78 [xii, Greg. xi], 13-½ × 9-7/8, ff. 273 (20),
2 cols., carelessly written, but with important readings: <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Luke xxii.
17, &amp;c., Vol. II. Chap. XII. Edited by Matthaei, 1791.
</p>

<p>
[+]33. Card. Alex. Albani [xi], 4to, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, a menology edited by Steph.
Ant. Morcelli, Rome, 1788.
</p>

<p>
[+]34. Munich, Reg. Gr. 329 [x, Greg. ix], 11 × 8, 3 vols., ff. 430 (18),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, in massive uncials, from Mannheim, the last three out
of four volumes, the menology suiting the custom of a monastery on
Athos (Rink, Scholz). Burgon refers to Hardt's Catalogue, iii. 314 seq.
</p>

<p>
Evst. 35-39 were inspected or collated by Birch, 40-43 by Moldenhawer.
</p>

<p>
[+]35. Rom. Vat. Gr. 351 [x], 13-¼ × 9-7/8, ff. 151 (11), <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, contains only
the Lessons for holidays.
</p>

<p>
*[+]36. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1067 [ix], 13-3/8 × 10, ff. 368 (21), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>,
a valuable copy, completely collated.
</p>

<p>
37. (Apost. 7.) Rom. Propaganda, Borgian. L. xvi. 6 [xi, Greg. xii],
10-¾ × 8 ½, ff. 160 (24), 2 cols., contains only thirteen Lessons from the
Gospels.
</p>

<p>
For the next two <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> 117, 118. Hort's 38 = x<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>, 39 = y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Hort,
pp. 77 note, and 296-7.) Instead&mdash;
</p>

<p>
38. Lond. Brit. Mus. 25,881 [xv, Greg. xiv], ff. 4 at end (24), 2 cols.,
Matt. xviii. 12-18; iv. 25-v. 30; xviii. 18-20. (Greg. 328<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
39. Lond. Brit. Mus. 34,059 [xii], 10 × 8-¼, ff. 238 (21), 2 cols., ends
with ἀναγνώσματα and τὰ διάφορα. Bought of A. Carlenizza of Pola, in
1891.
</p>

<p>
[+]40. Escurial I [x], 4to, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>, kept with the reliques there as an
autograph of St. Chrysostom. It was given by Queen Maria of Hungary
(who obtained it from Jo. Diassorin) to Philip II. Moldenhawer collated
fifteen Lessons. The text is of the common type, but in the oblong
shape of the letters, false breathings and accents, the red musical notes,
&amp;c., it resembles Evst. 1, though its date is somewhat lower. Omitted
by Montana.
</p>

<p>
[+]41. Escurial χ. iii. 12 [x, or xi with Montana], 4to, ff. 204, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>,
very elegant: the menology (as also that of Evst. 43) suited to the use of
a Byzantine Church.
</p>

<p>
[+]42. Escurial χ. iii. 13 [ix, or xi with Montana], 4to, ff. 227, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at the beginning. Two hands appear, the earlier leaning a little to
the right.
</p>

<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>

<p>
43. Escurial χ. iii. 16 [xi, or xii with Montana], 4to, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at the
beginning, in large cursive letters; with full <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>
</p>

<p>
44. (Apost. 8.) Havniens. Reg. 1324 [xv, Greg. xii], 10-½ × 7-½, ff. 195,
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, and much in a still later hand. Its history resembles that
of Evann. 234-5 (Hensler).
</p>

<p>
[+]45. Vindobon. Caesar. Jurid. 5 [x], 11-5/8 × 7-7/8, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, 2 cols., six leaves
from the binding of a law-book: the letters resemble the Tübingen
fragment, Griesbach's R (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> p. <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>) or Wetstein's 98 (Alter).
</p>

<p>
[+]46. Vind. Caesar. Suppl. Gr. 12 [ix], 6-½ × 5-½, ff. 182 (9), <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, on
purple vellum with gold and silver letters. There is a Latin version
(Bianchini, Treschow, Alter). Silvestre has a facsimile, Paléogr. Univ.,
No. 69.
</p>

<p>
*[+]47. Moscow, S. Synod. 43 [viii], fol., ff. 246, 2 cols., <q>a barbaro scriptus
est, sed ex praestantissimo exemplari,</q> Matthaei (B), whose codices extend
down to 57.
</p>

<p>
*48. Mosc. Syn. 44 (Mt. c) [by Peter, a monk, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1056], fol., ff. 250,
2 cols., from the Iberian monastery at Athos. In 1312 it belonged to
Nicephorus, Metropolitan of Crete.
</p>

<p>
*49. Mosc. Typograph. Syn. 11 (Mt. f) [x and xi], fol., ff. 437, 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> Superior in text to Cod. 48, but much in a later hand.
</p>

<p>
*[+]50. Mosc. Typ. Syn. 12 (Mt. H) [viii ?], fol., ff. 231, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi> A very
valuable copy, whose date Matthaei seems to have placed unreasonably
high. [Greg. xiv.]                    `
</p>

<p>
*51. Mosc. Typ. Syn. 9 (Mt. t) [xvi], 4to, ff. 42, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
</p>

<p>
*52. (Apost. 16.) Mosc. Syn. 266 (Mt. ξ) [xiv], 4to, ff. 229, contains
a Euchology and ἀποστολοευαγγέλια, as also do 53, 54, 55.
</p>

<p>
*53. (Apost. 17.) Mosc. Syn. 267 (Mt. χ) [xiv or xv], 4to, ff. 333,
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, from the monastery of Simenus on Athos.
</p>

<p>
*54. (Apost. 18.) Mosc. Syn. 268 (Mt. ψ) [written <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1470, by
Dometius, a monk], 4to, ff. 344, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, from the Vatopedion monastery on
Athos.
</p>

<p>
*55. (Apost. 19.) Mosc. Typ. Syn. 47 (Mt. ω) [the Apost. copied at
Venice, 1602], 4to, ff. 586, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, wretchedly written.
</p>

<p>
*56. (Apost. 20.) Mosc. Typ. Syn. 9 (Mt. 16) [xv or xvi], 16mo,
ff. 42, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, fragments of little value.
</p>

<p>
*57. Dresdensis Reg. A. 151 (Mt. 19) [xv], 8-½ × 6-1/8, ff. 408 (20),
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, came from Italy, and, like Apoc. 32, once belonged to Loescher,
then to the Count de Brühl. It is a Euchology, or Greek Service Book
(Suicer, Thesaur. Ecclesiast., i. p. 1287), described in Matthaei, Appendix
to St. John's Gospel, p. 378.
</p>

<p>
Evst. 58-157 were added to the list by Scholz, who professes to have
collated entire 60; in the greater part 81, 86.
</p>

<p>
58. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 50 [xv], 11 × 8-¼, ff. 49 (11), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, brought
from some church in Greece.
</p>

<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>

<p>
59. Instead of what was really Evan. 289&mdash;
</p>

<p>
Lond. Egerton 2163 [xii-xiii], 12-1/8 × 8, ff. 207 (26, 25), handsome,
titles in gold, initials in gold and colours, <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
(Greg. 339.)
</p>

<p>
*60. (Apost. 12.) Par. Nat. Gr. 375, once Colbert's, formerly De
Thou's [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1022], 9-¼ × 6-¾, ff. 195 (28); it contains many valuable
readings (akin to those of Codd. ADE), but numerous errors. Written
by Helias, a priest and monk, <q>in castro de Colonia,</q> for the use of the
French monastery of St. Denys.
</p>

<p>
[+]61. (Evan. 747.) Par. Nat. Gr. 182 [x], 4to, a fragment.
</p>

<p>
62. Instead of what was really Evan. 303&mdash;
</p>

<p>
Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 29,713 [late xi, Greg. xiv], 13 × 10, ff. 296
(25), very handsome, illuminated head-pieces and initial letters, some in
gold. (Greg. 332.)
</p>

<p>
[+]63. Par. Nat. Gr. 277 [ix], 11-¼ × 8-¼, ff. 158 (22), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
at the beginning and end.
</p>

<p>
[+]64. Par. Nat. Gr. 281 [ix], 10-7/9 × 8, ff. 210 (22), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, from
Constantinople; many leaves are torn.
</p>

<p>
[+]65. Par. Nat. Gr. 282 [ix], 11-¾ × 9-¼, ff. 213 (20), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, a
palimpsest, with a Church-service in later writing [xiii].
</p>

<p>
[+]66. Par. Nat. Gr. 283 [ix], 11-¼ × 8-¼, ff. 275 (19), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, also
a palimpsest, with the older writing of course misplaced; the later (<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
in fine) a Church-service [xiii].
</p>

<p>
[+]67. Par. Nat. Gr. 284 [xi, Greg. xii], 11-½ × 9-1/8, ff. 270 (18), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <q>optimae notae.</q>
</p>

<p>
68. Par. Nat. Gr. 285, once Colbert's [xi, Greg. xii], 12-¾ × 9-3/8, ff. 357
(23), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, initio et fine.
</p>

<p>
69. Par. Nat. Gr. 286 [xi, Greg. xii], 12 × 9-1/8, ff. 257 (25), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, in fine.
</p>

<p>
70. Par. Nat. Gr. 288 [xi, Greg. xii], 13-½ × 10-½, ff. 313 (25), 2 cols.,
brought from the East in 1669. A few leaves at the beginning and end
later, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
</p>

<p>
71. Par. Nat. Gr. 289, once Colbert's [July, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1066], 12-3/8 × 8-7/8,
ff. 159 (26), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>  Written by John, a priest, for George, a monk,
partly on vellum, partly on cotton paper.
</p>

<p>
72. Par. Nat. Gr. 290 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1257], 9-7/8 × 7-5/8, ff. 190, 2 cols. Written
by Nicolas. To this codex is appended&mdash;
</p>

<p>
[+]72<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>, three uncial leaves [ix], <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>, containing John v. 1-11; vi. 61-69;
vii. 1-15.
</p>

<p>
73. Par. Nat. Gr. 291 [xii], 10-¾ × 8-3/8, ff. 34 (25), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
</p>

<p>
74. Par. Nat. Gr. 292, once Mazarin's [xii], 9-5/8 × 8, ff. 274 (18),
2 cols.
</p>

<p>
75. Par. Nat. Gr. 293, from the East [xii], 11 × 8-7/8, ff. 250 (29),
2 cols.
</p>

<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>

<p>
76. Par. Nat. Gr. 295, once Colbert's [xii], 12-7/8 × 9-1/8, ff. 182 (28),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
</p>

<p>
77. Par. Nat. Gr. 296 [xii], 10-7/8 × 8-½, ff. 258 (20), 2 cols., from
Constantinople.
</p>

<p>
78. Par. Nat. Gr. 298, once Colbert's [xii], 10 × 7-½, ff. 95 (28), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> Some hiatus are supplied later on cotton paper.
</p>

<p>
79. Par. Nat. Gr. 299 [xii, Greg. xiv], 12-½ × 9-7/8, ff. 120 (26), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> initio et fine.
</p>

<p>
80. Par. Nat. Gr. 300 [xii], 10-½ × 8-¼, ff. 128, 2 cols.
</p>

<p>
81. Par. Nat. Gr. 305 [xiii, Greg. xiv], 11-5/8 × 9-¼, ff. 197 (22), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, perhaps written in Egypt. Some passages supplied [xv] on cotton
paper.
</p>

<p>
82. (Apost. 31.) Par. Nat. Gr. 276 [xv, Greg. xiv], 9-¾ × 6-½, ff. 150
(27), <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, with Lessons from the Prophets.
</p>

<p>
83. (Apost. 21.) Par. Nat. Gr. 294 [xi, Greg. xii], 11 × 8-½, ff. 245
(26), 2 cols.
</p>

<p>
84. (Apost. 9.) Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 32 a [xii, Greg. xiii], 12-5/8 × 8-5/8,
ff. 212 (66), 2 cols., and
</p>

<p>
85. (Apost. 10.) Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 33 [xii], 11-5/8 × 8-7/8, ff. 248,
2 cols., have Lessons from the Old and New Testament.
</p>

<p>
86. Par. Nat. Gr. 311 [July, 1336, Indict. 4], 13-3/8 × 10, ff. 382 (20),
2 cols. Written by Charito, given by the monk Ignatius to the
monastery τῶν ὁδηγῶν or Θεοτόκου at Constantinople (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Act. 169):
afterwards it was Boistaller's, and is described by Montfaucon. John
vii. 53-viii. 11 is at the end, obelized, and not appointed for any day,
since the names of Pelagia or Theodora are not in the menology of this
copy.
</p>

<p>
87. Par. Nat. Gr. 313 [xiv], 10 × 7-¾, ff. 121, 2 cols., once Colbert's
(as were 88-91; 99-101).
</p>

<p>
88. Par. Nat. Gr. 314 [xiv], 12-¾ × 7-1/8, ff. 190, 2 cols. Many verses
are omitted, and the arrangement of the Lessons is a little unusual.
</p>

<p>
89. Par. Nat. Gr. 316 [xiv], 10-1/8 × 6-¾, ff. 208 (25), on cotton paper,
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> in fine.
</p>

<p>
90. Par. Nat. Gr. 317 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1533, Indict. 6], 11-5/8 × 7-7/8, ff. 223 (25),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> Written by Stephen, a reader.
</p>

<p>
91. Par. Nat. Gr. 318 [xi, Greg. xiv], 10-½ × 7-¾, ff. 322, 2 cols., a subscription,
&amp;c., written in Cyprus by the monk Leontius, 1553 (Montfauc.,
Palaeogr. Graec., p. 89).
</p>

<p>
92. (Apost. 35.) Par. Nat. Gr. 324 [xiii, Greg. xiv], 8-5/8 × 5-¾, ff. 212
(21), on cotton paper, with fragments of the Liturgies of SS. Basil,
Chrysostom, and the Praesanctified.
</p>

<p>
93. (Apost. 36.) Par. Nat. Gr. 326 [xiv, Greg. xvi], 8-1/8 × 5-3/8, ff. 144,
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, with the Liturgies of SS. Chrysostom and Basil.
</p>

<p>
94. (Apost. 29.) Par. Nat. Gr. 330 [xiii, Greg. xii], 7-1/8 × 5-3/8, ff. 176,
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, with a Euchology and part of a Church-service in a later
hand [xv].
</p>

<p>
95. Par. Nat. Gr. 374 [xiv], 9-¼ × 7, ff. 114 (32), 2 cols., from
Constantinople.
</p>

<p>
96. (Apost. 262.) Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 115 [xii, Greg. xvi], 8-½ × 5-¾,
ff. 171 (25), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, initio et fine.
</p>

<p>
97. (Evan. 324, Apost. 32.) Par. Nat. Gr. 376, only the εὐαγγέλια τῶν
πάθων (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 324).
</p>

<p>
98. Par. Nat. Gr. 377 [xiii, Greg. xv], 9 × 6-7/8, ff. 196 (21). Once
Mazarin's; portions are palimpsest, and the older writing seems to
belong to an Evangelistarium.
</p>

<p>
99. Par. Nat. Gr. 380 [xv, Greg. xvi], 8-¼ × 5-7/8, ff. 243 (22), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
Wrongly set down as Evan. 327.
</p>

<p>
100. Par. Nat. Gr. 381 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1550], 8-¼ × 5-7/8, ff. 306 (20), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
Written at Iconium by Michael Maurice. Wrongly set down as Evan.
328.
</p>

<p>
101. Par. Nat. Gr. 303 [xiii, Greg. xiv], 11-1/8 × 7-¾, ff. 279 (25), 2 cols.,
grandly written. Wrongly set down as Evan. 321.
</p>

<p>
102. Milan, Ambros. S. 62 sup. [Sept. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1370], 11 × 8-½, ff. 120
(35), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> Written by Stephen, a priest (but with two leaves of parchment
at the beginning, two at the end), bought at Taranto, 1606, with
<q>commentarii incerti auctoris in omnia Evangelia quae per annum in
Ecclesia Graeca leguntur,</q> according to Burgon.
</p>

<p>
103. Milan, Ambr. D. 67 sup. [xiii], 11-5/8 × 8, ff. 138 (31), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>;
bought 1606, <q>Corneliani in Salentinis.</q> <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Apost. 46.
</p>

<p>
104. (Apost. 47.) Milan, Ambr. D. 72 sup. [xii], 11-½ × 8-¾, ff. 128 (23),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> initio et fine: brought from Calabria, 1607.
</p>

<p>
105. Milan, Ambr. M. 81 sup. [xiii], 10 × 7-1/8, ff. 157 (20), 2 cols.,
carefully written, but the first 19 leaves [xvi] <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
</p>

<p>
106. Milan, Ambr. C. 91 sup. [xiii], 11-¾ × 9-1/8, ff. 355 (20), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, splendidly written in a large cursive hand. <q>Corcyrae emptus.</q>
</p>

<p>
107. Venice, St. Mark 548 [xi, Greg. xii], 12 × 9-1/8, ff. 265 (20), 2
cols., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
108. Ven. St. Mark 549 [xi], 12-3/8 × 9-½, ff. 292 (23), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi>, a grand and gorgeous fol., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> in fine.
</p>

<p>
109. Ven. St. Mark 550 [xi, Greg. xiv], 11-1/8 × 8, ff. 206 (28), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> (Burgon), <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
</p>

<p>
110. Ven. St. Mark 551 [xi, Greg. xiii], 13-¾ × 10-¼, ff. 278 (22),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, a glorious codex, containing only the σαββατοκυριακαί (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi>
Evst. 24): the last few leaves are ancient, although supplied on paper.
</p>

<p>
[+]111. Modena, Este ii. C. 6 [x], 9-¾ × 6-¼, ff. ?, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, small
thick folio in one column on a page. Montfaucon assigns it to the eighth
century, and Burgon admits that he might have done so too, but that it
contains in the menology (Dec. 16) the name of Queen Theophano, who
died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 892.
</p>

<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>

<p>
112. (Apost. 41.) Flor. Laurent. Conv. Soppr. 24 [xi], 7-3/8 × 5-3/8,
ff. 145 (22), <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> initio.
</p>

<p>
113. Flor. Laur. vi. 2 [ff. 1-213, xii; the rest written by one
George, xiv], 14-½ × 11-5/8, ff. 341 (19), 2 cols. Prefixed are verses of
Arsenius, Archbishop of Monembasia (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 333), addressed to
Clement VII (1523-34).
</p>

<p>
114. Flor. Laur. vi. 7 [xii, Greg. xiv], 13-3/8 × 10-¼, ff. 180 (18), 2 cols.,
magnificently illuminated.
</p>

<p>
[+]115. Flor. Laur. vi. 21 [xi, Greg. x], 9-½ × 7-¾, ff. 261 (20), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, elegantly written.
</p>

<p>
[+]116. Flor. Laur. vi. 31 [x], 12 × 9, ff. 226 (20), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi>, elegant.
</p>

<p>
117. Flor. Laur. 244 [xii], 13-1/8 × 10-¾, ff. 119 (10), 2 cols., most
beautifully written in golden cursive letters, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, once kept among the
choicest κειμήλια of the Grand Ducal Palace. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> above, Evst. 38, 39.
</p>

<p>
[+]118. Flor. Laur. 243, kept in a chest for special preservation [xi,
Greg. xiv], 15 × 11-¼, ff. 368 (20), 2 cols., most elegant. Evst. 113-18
were described by Canon Angelo Bandini, 1787.
</p>

<p>
119. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1155 [xiii], 13-¾ × 10-5/8, ff. 268 (25), 2 cols.
</p>

<p>
120. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1256 [xiii], 14 × 10-¾, ff. 344 (20), 2 cols.
</p>

<p>
121. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1156 [xiii, Greg. xi], 14-3/8 × 10, ff. 419 (22), very
splendid.
</p>

<p>
122. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1168 [August, 1175], 10-½ × 7-3/8, ff. 194 (24), 2
cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, written by the monk Germanus for the monk Theodoret.
</p>

<p>
[+]123. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1522 [x], 11-1/8 × 8-¾, ff. 197 (11), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, very correctly written, without points.
</p>

<p>
124. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1988 [xii], 7-¾ × 5-7/8, ff. 162 (24), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
initio et fine.
</p>

<p>
125. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2017 [xi or xii], 8-5/8 ×  6-½, ff. 123 (23), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>,
with a subscription dated 1346, and a memorandum of the death (Oct. 12,
1345) and burial of one Constantia.
</p>

<p>
126. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2041 [xii], 12-1/8 × 8-7/8, ff. 337 (23), 2 cols., written
by one George; διὰ συνδρομῆς γεωργίου, whatever συνδρομή may mean.
</p>

<p>
[+]127. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2063 [ix], 10-5/8 × 7-¼, ff. 178 (20), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> initio et fine. The first two leaves of the Festival
Lessons [xiv]. Two not contemporaneous hands have been engaged upon
this copy.
</p>

<p>
128. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2133 [xiv], 11-½ × 8-7/8, ff. 393 (13).
</p>

<p>
129. Rom. Vat. Regin. Gr. 12 [xiii, Greg. xii], 10-¼ × 8-½, ff. 339 (24),
2 cols. Ff. 1-40 appear to have been written in France, and have an
unusual text: ff. 41-220 [xiii] are by another hand: the other 71
leaves to the end [xv].
</p>

<p>
[+]130. Rom. Vat. Ottob. 2 [ix], 13-1/8 × 9-5/8, ff. 343 (20), 2 vols., 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, very beautiful.
</p>

<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>

<p>
131. Rom. Vat. Ottob. 175 [xiv], 9-½ × 7-1/8, ff. 70 (12), a fragment.
</p>

<p>
132. Rom. Vat. Ottob. 326 [xv, Greg. xiv], 6-3/8 × 5-¼, ff. ?, in silver
letters. Procured at Rome, Sept. 11, 1590, <q>a Francisco et Accida</q> of
Messina, and given to Cardinal Sirlet (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 373, Apoc. 79).
</p>

<p>
133. (Apost. 39.) Rom. Vat. Ottob. 416 [xiv], 8-½ × 5-¼, ff. 296 (29),
1 and 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
</p>

<p>
134. Rom. Barberin. vi. 4 [xiii], 13-¼ × 11-¼, ff. 343 (21), 2 cols., the first
eight and last three leaves being paper.
</p>

<p>
[+]135. Rom. Barb. iv. 54, a palimpsest [vi Scholz, Greg. viii], 9-7/8 × 7,
ff. 165 (23), is Tischendorf's barb<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ev</hi>, and by him referred to the middle
of the seventh century, which is a somewhat earlier date than has hitherto
been assigned to Lectionaries. He has given specimens of its readings
in <q>Monum. sacr. ined.,</q> vol. i. pp. 207-210 (Matt. xxiv. 34-xxv. 16;
John xix. 11-25).
</p>

<p>
136. Rom. Barb. iv. 54 [xii], the later writing of the palimpsest Evst.
135.
</p>

<p>
137. Rom. Vallicell. D. 63, once Peter Polidore's [xii], 9-¼ × 7-¼, ff. 105
(20), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> initio.
</p>

<p>
138. Naples, I. B. 14 [xv], 10-½ × 8-1/8, ff. 255 (22), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, given
by Christopher Palaeologus, May 7, 1584, to the Church of SS. Peter
and Paul at Naples.
</p>

<p>
[+]139. Venice, St. Mark 12 [x], 12-½ × 9-½, ff. 219 (17), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
initio, with many erasures.
</p>

<p>
140. Instead of one which has no existence&mdash;
</p>

<p>
(Apost. 242.) Cairo, Patriarch. Alex. 18 [xv], 4to, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, Συναγωγὴ
λέξεων ἐκ παλαιᾶς καὶ νέας (Coxe).  (Greg. 759.)
</p>

<p>
141. Ven. St. Mark i. 9 [xi], 11-¾ × 9-¾, ff. 268 (15), 2 cols., <q>Monasterii
Divae Catharinae Sinaitarum quod extat Zacynthi.</q>
</p>

<p>
142. Ven. St. Mark i. 23 [xiv], 6-½ × 4-¾, ff. 45 (15), <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, only 45
pages, with one column on a page.
</p>

<p>
143. Instead of Evan. 468&mdash;
</p>

<p>
Jerusalem, Holy Sepulchre 12 [xi end], fol. (Coxe). (Greg. 158.)
</p>

<p>
[+]144. Biblio. Malatestianae of Cesena xxvii. 4, now at Rome [xii], fol.,
<hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, very splendid.
</p>

<p>
145. Bibl. Cesen. Malatest. xxix. 2 [xii], fol.
</p>

<p>
146. Cambr. Univ. Libr. Dd. viii. 23 [xi], 15-½ × 11-½, ff. 212 (29),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at end, neatly written for a church at Constantinople.
</p>

<p>
Evst. 147, 148 are in <emph>Latin</emph>, and 149 is Evan. 567. Instead&mdash;
</p>

<p>
147. St. Saba 17 [xii], 4to (Coxe). (Greg. 165.)
</p>

<p>
148. St. Saba 23 [xii], fol. (Coxe). (Greg. 168.)
</p>

<p>
149. St. Saba 24 [xi], fol. (Coxe). (Greg. 169.)
</p>

<p>
*[+]150. Lond. Brit. Mus. Harl. 5598 [May 27, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 995, Indict. 8],
13-¼ × 10-½, ff. 374 (21), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, written by
<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>
Constantine, a priest, is Scrivener's H (Cod. Augiensis, Introd. pp. xlvii-l),
for an alphabet formed from it <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> our Plate <ref target='Plate_III'>iii</ref>. No. 7. It was
brought from Constantinople by Dr. John Covell, in 1677 (Evan. 65),
and by him shown to Mill (N. T., Proleg. § 1426); from Covell it seems
to have been purchased (together with his other copies) by Harley, Earl
of Oxford. It is a most splendid specimen of the uncial class of Evangelistaria,
and its text presents many instructive variations. At the end
are several Lessons for special occasions, which are not often met with.
Collated also by (Bloomfield), and facsimiles given by the Palaeographical
Society, Plates 26, 27.
</p>

<p>
151. Lond. Brit. Mus. Harl. 5785 [xii], 12-½ × 9-½, ff. 359 (18), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, a splendid copy, in large, bold, cursive letters. At the
end is a note, written at Rome in 1699, by L. A. Zacagni, certifying that
the volume was then more than 700 years old. The date assigned above
is more likely (Bloomfield).
</p>

<p>
[+]152. Lond. Brit. Mus. Harl. 5787 [x], 12-¼ × 9, ff. 224 (24), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, the uncials leaning to the right, a fine copy, with small uncial
notes, well meriting collation. Called <q>Codex Prusensis</q> [Prusa, near
mount Olympus: Scholz's 171] in a MS. note of H. Wanley. It begins
John xx. 20, and is <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> in. some other parts. For a facsimile page <hi rend='italic'>see</hi>
the new <q>Catalogue of Ancient MSS. in the British Museum</q> (1881),
Plate 17.
</p>

<p>
153. Meerman 117 [xi], <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 436 ?, bought at Meerman's sale
by Payne, the bookseller, for £200. Its present owner is unknown.
(Compare Evan. 562.)
</p>

<p>
154. Munich, Reg. Gr. 326 [xiii], 12-3/8 × 9-7/8, ff. 49 (21), 2 cols., a fine
fol., written very small and neatly, containing the Lessons from the season
of Lent to the month of December in the menology, once at Mannheim.
It seems adapted to the Constantinopolitan use.
</p>

<p>
[+]155. Vindobon. Caes. Gr. Theol. 209 [x], 8-½ × 6-½, ff. 143 (27), <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, a palimpsest, over which is written a commentary on
St. Matthew [xiv].
</p>

<p>
156. Rom. Vallicell. D. 4. 1 [xi], fol., ff. 380, 2 cols., described by
Bianchini, Evan. Quadr., vol. ii. pt. i. p. 537; now missing. It must
have been a superb specimen of ancient art: about thirty of its pictures
are enumerated.
</p>

<p>
157. Oxf. Bodl., Clarke 8 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1253], 8 × 6-¾, ff. 198 (23), 2 cols.,
2 gatherings destroyed, and one leaf torn out. Written by Demetrius
Brizopoulos, σαββατοκυριακαί, (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evst. 24)<note place='foot'><p>As with the MSS. of the Gospels, and for the reasons assigned above, we
remove to the foot of the page, and do not reckon in our numbering, the twenty-one
copies seen by Scholz in Eastern Libraries.
</p>
<p>
158. Library of the Great Greek Monastery at Jerusalem, No. 10 [xiv], fol.
</p>
<p>
159. <q>Biblioth. monasterii virginum τῆς μεγάλης παναγίας a S. Melana erect.</q>
[xiii], fol., very neat (<q>non sec. viii ut monachi putant,</q> Scholz).
</p>
<p>
160. (Apost. 33.) St. Saba 4, written there by one Antony [xiv], 8vo.
</p>
<p>
161. St. Saba 5 [xv], 8vo, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
</p>
<p>
162. St. Saba 6 [xv], 16mo, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
</p>
<p>
163. St. Saba 13 [xiii], 4to, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, adapted (as also those that follow) to the use
of Palestine.
</p>
<p>
164. St. Saba [xiv], 4to.
</p>
<p>
165. St. Saba 17 [xv], 4to, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
</p>
<p>
166. St. Saba 21 [xiii], fol.
</p>
<p>
167. St. Saba 22 [xiv], fol.
</p>
<p>
168. St. Saba 23 [xiii], fol.
</p>
<p>
169. St. Saba 24 [xiii], fol.
</p>
<p>
170. St. Saba 25 [xiii], fol.
</p>
<p>
171. (Apost. 52.) St. Saba (unnumbered) [written July, 1059, in the monastery
of Θεοτόκος, by Sergius, a monk of Olympus in Bithynia], 8vo.
</p>
<p>
[+]172. Library of St. John's monastery at Patmos [<q>iv</q> Scholz, obviously a
misprint], fol.
</p>
<p>
[+]173. Patmos [ix], 4to.
</p>
<p>
[+]174. Patm. [x], 4to.
</p>
<p>
[+]175. Patm. [x], 4to.
</p>
<p>
176. Patm. [xii], 4to.
</p>
<p>
177. Patm. [xiii], 4to.
</p>
<p>
178. Patm. [xiv], 4to, in the same Library, but not numbered.
</p>
<p>
Some of these MSS. have been removed to Europe since Scholz made his
reckoning, e.g. Parham No. 20 (Evst. 236).</p></note>. (Greg.)
</p>

<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>

<p>
To Dean Burgon's care and industry we owe Codd. 158-178;
181-187.
</p>

<p>
158. Par. Suppl. Gr. 27 [xi, Greg. xii], 13 × 10-7/8, ff. 207 (24), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, beautifully illuminated: <q>Present de Mr. Desalleurs,
ambassadeur pour le roy en 1753, remis par ordre de Mr. le Cte. d'Argenson
le 7 Juillet, 1753,</q> (Greg. 261.)
</p>

<p>
159. Par. Suppl. Gr. 242 [xv, Greg. xvii], 16-¼ × 10-¾, ff. 265 (27),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, peculiarly bound, with oriental pictures. (Greg. 262.)
</p>

<p>
160. Bologna, Univ. 3638 [xiv], 11-3/8 × 9-¾, ff. 233 (27), 2 cols., written
by one Anthimus. This is No. xviii in Talman's and J. S. Assemani's
manuscript Catalogue, No. 25 in Mezzofanti's Index. (Greg. 281.)
</p>

<p>
161. Parma, Reg. 14 [xiv], 11-3/8 × 9-¾, ?, 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
Contains the Gospel for St. Pelagia's day. (Greg. 282.)
</p>

<p>
162. Siena, Univ. X. iv. 1 [xi or xii], 14-3/8 × 11-5/8, ff. 313 (23), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, one of the most splendid Service-books in the world, the
first five columns in gold, the covers enriched with sumptuous silver
enamels and graceful scroll-work. Bought at Venice in 1359 by Andrea
di Grazia for the Hospital of S. Maria della Scala, of P. di Giunta Torregiani,
a Florentine merchant, who a little before had bought it at
Constantinople of the agent of the Emperor John Cantacuzenus [1341-55].
(Greg. 283.)
</p>

<p>
163. Milan, [+]Ambr. Q. 79 sup. [x], 11-7/8 × 8-¼, a single uncial page of
a Lectionary. (Greg. 284.)
</p>

<p>
164. Milan, Ambr. E. S. v. 14 [xii], 10-½ × 8-½, ff. 37 (22), 2 cols., two
separate fragments, one being fol., in two columns, roughly written.
(Greg. 285<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
165. Milan, Ambr. ol. E. S. v. 13, now bound up with 164 [xiv], at
f. 67, 11-¼ × 8-½, f. 1, 2 cols. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 285.)
</p>

<p>
166. (Apost. 181.) Milan, Ambr. D. 108 sup. [xiii], 11-3/8 × 8-½, ff. 204
(29), 2 cols. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 287.)
</p>

<p>
167. Milan, Ambr. A. 150 sup. [xiii], 11-7/8 × 9-½, ff. 124 (24), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> (ff. 1-9, 104-123, chart.). (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 288.)
</p>

<p>
168. Milan, Ambr. C. 160 inf. [xiv], 12-¾ × 10, ff. 156 (27), 2 cols.,
mut. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 289.)
</p>

<p>
169. Milan, Ambr. P. 274 sup. [xiv or xv], 10-3/8 × 7-½, ff. 198 (23), <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>,
in disorder. (See Greg. 290.)
</p>

<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>

<p>
Besides examining the eight Evangelistaria at St. Mark's, Venice,
described in the preceding catalogue (Evst. 107-10; 139-42), Burgon
found, exclusive of Evst. 175, eight more: viz.
</p>

<p>
170. Venice, St. Mark i. 4 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1381], 8-½ × 5-7/8, ff. 209 (22), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>,
rather barbarously written by the priest John. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 264.)
</p>

<p>
[+]171. Ven. St. Mark i. 45 [x], 13-3/8 × 10-½, ff. 78 (20), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> initio. (Greg. 265.)
</p>

<p>
172. Ven. St. Mark i. 46 [xii ?], 10-¼ × 8, ff. 50 (22), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> coarse. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 266.)
</p>

<p>
173. Ven. St. Mark. i. 47 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1046<note place='foot'>At the end in small gold uncials the following very curious colophon was
deciphered by Dean Burgon and the learned sub-librarian Signor Veludo jointly:
Μηνὶ μαΐω Ἰνδ. ΙΔ. ἔτους ϛφνδ᾽. προσηνέχθη παρὰ βασιλείου μοναχοῦ πρεσβυτέρου καὶ
ἡγουμένου τῆς σεβασμίας μονῆς τῆς κοιμήσεως τῆς θ<hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>κου</hi> εἰς τὴν ἀυτὴν μονὴν βιβλία
τέσσαρα; τὸ ἀυτὸεὐαγγέλιον, ἀπόστολος, προφητεία, καὶ ἀναγνοστικόν, ὁ βίος τοῦ ἁγίου.
καὶ ἐστύχηται δίδωσθαι ὑπὲρ τῆς αὐτῆς προσενέξαιως ἑνὶ ἑκάστω χρόνω ἀπὸ τοῦ δοχείου
τῆς αὐτῆς μονῆς ὑπὲρ μνήμης αὐτ νόμισμα ἒν ἥμισον, μέχ[ρι γὰρ τού] τὰ τῶν χριστιανῶν
[συ]νίσταται; περιφυλάττεται δὲ καὶ ἡ ἁγία μονὴ αὕτη; ἐν γὰρ τῶ τυπικῶ τῆς μονῆς
περὶ τοῦ κατίδους (<hi rend='italic'>sic</hi>) τῶν ἀυτῆς βιβλίων, καὶ περὶ τῆς διανομῆς τοῦ ἑνὸς ἡμίσου νομίσματος
σαφέστερον διερμηνεύει.</note>], 13-1/8 × 10-3/8, ff. 350 (24), 2 cols.,
a grand cursive folio, sumptuously adorned. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 267.)
</p>

<p>
174. Ven. St. Mark i. 48 [xii], 10-3/8 × 8-¼, ff. 281 (20), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi>, with unusual contents. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 268.)
</p>

<p>
*[+]175. ven<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ev</hi>. Ven. St. Mark i. 49 [vii or viii], 9-¼ × 8, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, three nearly
illegible palimpsest leaves (edited by Tischendorf in <q>Monum. sacr. ined.,</q>
vol. i. pp. 199, &amp;c.), (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evst. 135), containing Matt. viii. 32-ix. 1; 9-13;
John ii. 15-22; iii. 22-26; vi. 16-26; or twenty-seven verses.
</p>

<p>
176. Ven. St. Mark i. 50 [xiv or xv], 11-3/8 × 7-7/8, ff. 403 (22), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 270.)
</p>

<p>
177. Ven. St. Mark i. 51 [xv, Greg. xvii], 8 × 5-½, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, eleven poor
leaves. (Greg. 271.)
</p>

<p>
178. Ven. St. Mark i. 52 [xvi], 10-¼ × 7-½, ff. 276 (26), <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, from Corfu. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 272.)
</p>

<p>
*[+]179. (Apost. 55.) Trèves, Cath. Libr. 143. F [x or xi], 10-1/8 × 7-¾,
ff. 202 (24), <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, called St. Simeon's, and brought by him from Syria in
the eleventh century, consists chiefly of Lessons from the Old Testament.
It contains many itacisms and some unusual readings. Edited in 1834 by
B. M. Steininger in his <q>Codex S. Simeonis exhibens lect. eccl. gr. dccc
ann. vetustate insigne.</q> (Greg. 179.)
</p>

<p>
[+]180. Vindob. Caes. 209 [ix, Greg. x], 8-½ × 6-½, ff. 143 (27), <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Minusc.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, a palimpsest, with many itacisms (Scholz, Endlicher).
Readings are given by Scholz (N. T., vol. ii. pp. lv-lxiii). (Greg. 155.)
</p>

<p>
In the Treasury of the Church of St. Mark at Venice Burgon found,
besides those just named, three others, nearly ruined by the damp of the
place where they are kept.
</p>

<p>
181. Ven. St. Mark, Thesaur. i. 53 [xiii, Greg. xii], 11-¾ × 8-5/8, ff. ?,
2 cols., splendidly illuminated and bound in silver and enamel. Substitute
this for Wake 12 (=Evan. 492), inserted in error as Evst. 181.
</p>

<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>

<p>
182. Ven. St. Mark, Thes. i. 54 [xii, Greg. xiii], 10-7/8 × 8-3/8, ff. ?, 2 cols.,
once a fine codex, now tied up in a parcel by itself. (Greg. 276.)
</p>

<p>
183. Ven. St. Mark, Thes. i. 55 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1439], 13 × 10-1/8, ff. ?, 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, written by Sophronius at Ferrara, poor enough inside, but kept in
a glass case for the sake of its gorgeous silver cover, which came from
St. Sophia's at Constantinople. (Greg. 277.)
</p>

<p>
The next three are bound in red velvet, and in excellent preservation.
</p>

<p>
184. Ven. S. Giorgio di Greco Α᾽ [xiv, Greg. xii], 12-¼ × 10-¼, ff. 413
(21), 2 cols., is very splendidly illuminated, and was once used for the
<emph>Greek</emph> service of this church. (Greg. 279.)
</p>

<p>
185. Ven. S. Giorgio di Greco Γ᾽ [xiv], 9-5/8 × 7-¼, ff. 240 (28).
Professes to be Written by Νικολαος ὁ Μαλω<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>tr</hi>, πρωτέκδικος τῆς ἁγιωτάτης
μητροπόλεως Λακεδαίμονι. It seems to have been brought hither <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1422.
(Greg. 280.)
</p>

<p>
186. Ven. S. Giorgio di Greco Β᾽ [xiii], 11-½ × 8-½, ff. 223 (21), 2 cols.,
is the largest, but contains only σαββατοκυριακαί (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evst. 24). (Greg.
278.)
</p>

<p>
187. Flor. Laurent. S. Marci 706 [xi or xii], 9-¼ × 7-7/8, ff. 181 (21), 2
cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, cursive, much used. (Greg. 291.)
</p>

<p>
188. Rom. Vat. Pii II. Gr. 33 [x or xi], 8-¼ × 6, ff. 158 (26), 2 cols., a
fine specimen. (Greg. 570.)
</p>

<p>
[+]189. carp<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ev</hi>. Carpentras, Bibl. Urb. 11 [ix, Greg. x], 14 × 10-5/8, ff. 277
(24), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, examined by Tischendorf in 1843. Extracts
are given in his <q>Anecd. sacr. et prof.,</q> pp. 151, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
[+]190. tisch<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ev</hi>. Leipzig, Univ. Libr. Tisch. V [viii or ix], 10-¾ × 8-½, ff. 89
(20), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, a palimpsest, described <q>Anecd. sacr. et prof.,</q>
pp. 29, &amp;c. (Greg. 293.)
</p>

<p>
[+]191. (Apost. 178.) Petrop<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ev</hi>. Petrop. Caes. Muralt. 44 [ix], 4to, ff. 69,
ill written, but with a remarkable text; the date being tolerably fixed by
Arabic matter decidedly more modern, written 401 and 425 of the
Hegira (i.e. about <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1011 and 1035) respecting the birth and baptism
of the two Holy infants. There are but ten Lessons from St. Matthew, and
nineteen from other parts of the New Testament, enumerated by Tischendorf
in <q>Notitia. Cod. Sinaitici,</q> p. 54. This copy contains the two leaves on cotton
paper, with writing by the first hand, mentioned above, p. <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, note 2.
(Greg. 249.)
</p>

<p>
[+]192. (Apost. 73.) Petrop<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ev. 2</hi>. Petrop. Caes. Muralt. 90 [xii], 8vo.,
ff. 93 (21), a fragment. Tischendorf, Notitia Cod. Sinaitici, p. 63. (Greg.
256.)
</p>

<p>
193. Besançon, Bibl. Urb. 44 [?], 11-5/8 × 7-5/8, ff. 210 (22), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi> (letter from M. Castan, the Librarian, to Burgon). (Greg. 263.)
</p>

<p>
[+]194. 1<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>pe</hi>. Petrop. Caes. Muralt. iv. 13 [ix], fol., ff. 2 (21), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>
Matt. viii. 10-13; xxvii. 1-9; Mark vi. 14-18; Luke iv. 33-36.
(Greg. 246.)
</p>

<p>
195. 3<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>pe</hi>. Petrop. Caes. Muralt. (56) vii. 179 [x], fol., ff. 251 (26), 2
<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>
cols., and (Apost. 54) Praxapostolos (Petrop. viii. 80), <q>cum Codice G
[Angelico] consentiens exc. Act. xxvii. 29; xxviii. 2.</q> (Greg. 251.)
</p>

<p>
196. 6<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>pe</hi>. Petrop. Caes. Muralt. (71) x. 180 [<hi rend='italic'>dated</hi> Salernum, 1022],
4to, ff. 170 (20), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> throughout. (Greg. 253.)
</p>

<p>
197. 9<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>pe</hi>. Petrop. Caes. Muralt. xi. 3. 181 [xiii], 4to, ff. 3 (20), 2 cols.,
fragments: Matt. xxviii. 12-18; Luke iv. 16-22; John x. 9-14; xix.
6, 9-11; 14-19, 20; 25-28: 30-35. (Greg. 258.)
</p>

<p>
198. 10<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>pe</hi>. Panticapaeense [of Kertch ?], Palaeologi, collated at Odessa,
and the collation sent to Muralt. (Greg. 260.)
</p>

<p>
199. Fragments of two leaves [ix, Greg. xiii], 11-¼ × 7-¼, ff. 176 (34),
bound up in Evan. 68. (Evan. 68.)
</p>

<p>
200. The cursive Lessons which overlie the uncial fragment of St. Luke
(Ξ). (Greg. 299.)
</p>

<p>
[+]201. Oxf. Bodl. Barocc. 197 [x], 11-¾ × 7-¼, ff. 5 (2), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>,
uncial palimpsest leaves, used for binding. (Greg. 205.)
</p>

<p>
[+]202. Oxf. Bodl. Canonici Gr. 85 [ix], 13 × 9-¼, ff. 259 (18), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, passages and directions in later cursive hand, much <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> The
uncials lean a little to the left. (Greg. 194.)
</p>

<p>
[+]203. Oxf. Bodl. Can. Gr. 92 [x], 15-¾ × 12, ff. 483 (14), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi>, large folio, very splendid, with gilt initial letters. (Greg. 195.)
</p>

<p>
204. Oxf. Bodl. Can. Gr. 119 [xv], 11-½ × 7-1/8, ff. 155 (26), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, belonging
in 1626 to Nicolas, a priest. (Greg. 196.)
</p>

<p>
205. Oxf. Bodl. Can. Gr. 126, 9-½ × 8, ff. 8 (20), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> (Greg. 197.)
</p>

<p>
206. Oxf. Bodl. Clarke 45 [xii], 11-½ × 9, ff. 276 (24), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi> bound-up in disorder (Burgon), splendid but spoiled by damp.
(Greg. 198.)
</p>

<p>
207. Oxf. Bodl. Clarke 46 [xiii], 11 × 9, ff. 252 (21), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
initio et fine. <q>A fine ruin, miserably cropped by the modern binder:
the writing is very dissimilar in parts</q> (Burgon). (Greg. 199.)
</p>

<p>
208. Oxf. Bodl. Clarke 47 [xii], 10-½ × 8-½, ff. 292 (23), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi>, much like Evst. 206. (Greg. 200.)
</p>

<p>
209. Oxf. Bodl. Clarke 48 [xiii], 10-½ × 7-¾, ff. 187 (27), 2 cols., carelessly
and ill written: <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> initio. (Greg. 201.)
</p>

<p>
210. Oxf. Bodl. Cromw. 27 [xi], 11-½ × 8-¾, ff. 315 (22), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>,
from Athos 1727, once Irene's. (Greg. 202.)
</p>

<p>
211. Oxf. Bodl. Misc. Gr. 119 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1067], 11 × 8, ff. 300 (22), <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi>, containing two parts, (1) Evst., (2) <hi rend='italic'>Men.</hi> The first two leaves and
the last two were evidently written and inserted later in place of two
damaged leaves, and bear the date <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1067, probably copied from the
vanished leaf. (MS. note in Bodl. Cat. by Mr. E. B. Nicholson.)
</p>

<p>
[+] This Evst. was formerly preceded by one uncial palimpsest leaf,
containing parts of Rom. xiv, Heb. i. 1-11, which are now bound up in
a separate volume. The whole volume was bought of Payne and Foss,
London, in 1820. (Greg. 203.)
</p>

<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>

<p>
212. Oxf. Bodl. Misc. 140 [xi], 9 × 7, ff. 305 (10), <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, not in
regular order, but in order of holy days, a very beautiful copy, one
volume only out of a set of four. (Greg. 204.)
</p>

<p>
[+]213. Oxf. Christ Church, Wake 13, 12 × 9, ff. 261, contains three
uncial leaves [ix], Matt. xxv. 31-36; vi. 1-18 (dox<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>y</hi>, in Lord's Prayer),
the rest cursive [xi], <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, in a very large, bold, peculiar hand.
Two palimpsest leaves at the end cursive in later [xv], John xx. 19-xxi.
25. (Greg. 206.)
</p>

<p>
214. Ch. Ch. Wake 14 [xii], 11-½ × 9, ff. 243 (20), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>,
miniatures on pp. 108, 174, 182, ends at Matt. xxviii. 4. Has one leaf
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, and two leaves at the beginning and end from the Old Testament,
1 Kings xvii. 12, &amp;c. (Greg. 207.)
</p>

<p>
215. Ch. Ch. Wake 15 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1068], 9-½ × 7-¾, ff. 217, 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>,
and 2 ff. of Old Testament (first and last) being earlier. Written by
Leontius of St. Clement's (Bryennios). (Greg. 208.)
</p>

<p>
216. Ch. Ch. Wake 16 [xiii], 9-½ × 7-½, ff. 217 (21), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> initio et fine. (Greg. 209.)
</p>

<p>
217. Ch. Ch. Wake 17 [xiii or xiv], 9-½ × 7, ff. 227 (21), 2 cols., 15 ff.
(213-227) by a later hand, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> in fine. (Greg. 210.)
</p>

<p>
218. Ch. Ch. Wake 18 [palimpsest xiv over xi], 12-¼ × 8-¼, ff. 218 (29),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, ill written. The first leaf contains the history of St.
Varus and six martyrs. (Greg. 211.) This is Walker's E: his H is
</p>

<p>
219. Ch. Ch. Wake 19 [xi], 11 × 8-½, ff. 248 (20), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi> Of this codex the ninth leaf is wanting. (Greg. 212.)
</p>

<p>
220. Ch. Ch. Wake 23 [xi], 11-¾ × 9-½, ff. 256 (25), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, an elegant copy. The last page has Mark xvi. 9-20. (Greg. 213.)
</p>

<p>
*221. Camb. Trin. Coll. O. iv. 22 [xii], 12-1/3 × 9, ff. 249 (18), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, once Dean Gale's (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. 66), in a bold hand, with
illuminations and red musical notes. There are daily Lessons from Easter
to Pentecost, but afterwards only σαββατοκυριακαί (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evst. 24), with full
Saints' Day Lessons. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Scrivener, Critica Sacra, p. xiv.) (Greg.
186.)
</p>

<p>
*222 or z<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. Camb. Christ's Coll. F. 1. 8 [xi], 11-¾ × 9, ff. 436 (30),
<hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, is much fuller than most Lectionaries, and contains many
minute variations<note place='foot'>Thus 222, with only two other Evangelistaria (6, 13) and Evan. 59 by the
first hand, supports Cod. א and Eusebius in the significant omission of υἱοῦ
βαραχίον, Matt. xxiii. 35.</note>: it exhibits a subscription dated 1261, Indict. 4, much
later than the codex, and a note stating that Francis Tayler, Preacher at
Christ's Church, Canterbury [the Cathedral], gave it to the College in
1654. There are also four Lessons from the prophets, and four from
St. Paul (Apost. 53). A facsimile is given, Cod. Augiens. Introd., p. li.
This is Hort's 59. (Greg. 185.)
</p>

<p>
The next four were collated by Dr. Bloomfield for his <q>Critical
Annotations on the Sacred Text.</q>
</p>

<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>

<p>
223. Lond. Lambeth Archiepiscopal Library 1187 [xiii], 10-¼ × 7-3/8, ff.
177 (26), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi> (Greg. 229.)
</p>

<p>
224. Lond. Lamb. 1188 [xiii], 11-¼ × 8-½, ff. 318 (22-4), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi>, judged by Bloomfield to be the fullest and most accurate here, or at
the British Museum. (Greg. 230.)
</p>

<p>
225. Lond. Lamb. 1189 [xiii], 8-¾ × 7-¼, ff. 160 (27), 4 cotton (later),
τίτλ. (Greg. 231.)
</p>

<p>
226. Lond. Lamb. 1193, 9-¼ × 6-7/8, ff. 153 (26), <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at the
end. Bloomfield assigns this to [ix], but Archdeacon Todd, in his
(undated) <q>Account of Greek Manuscripts,</q> &amp;c., at Lambeth, sets it
down as [xiii]. (Greg. 232.)
</p>

<p>
227. Lond. Sion College A. 32. 1, Ev. 1 (2) [xii], 10-½ × 8-½, ff. 246 (19),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, 194 leaves of σαββατοκυριακαί, a noble copy, one
leaf (149) being much mutilated, one leaf in later writing [xvi], and
perhaps one leaf lost at the end: otherwise complete, with fair illuminations
and red musical notes. (Greg. 234.) For its history <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan.
518, as also that of
</p>

<p>
228. Lond. Sion Coll. A. 32. 1, Ev. 1 (2) [xiv], 10-¼ × 7-5/8, ff. 142 (23-25),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> beginning and end. It begins at the Lesson for the
third day of the second week (John iii. 19) and ends at Mark vi. 19, in
the Lesson for Aug. 29. Two leaves are on paper, not much later than
the rest. There is a Lesson for Aug. 1, not very common, τῶν ἁγίων
μακκαβαίων, Matt. x. 16, &amp;c.  (Greg. 235.)
</p>

<p>
229. Lond. Sion Coll. A. 32. 1, Ev. 1 (4) [xiv, Greg. xiii], 10 × 9-1/8,
ff. 217 (19, 20), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at end, is complete up to the
Lesson for July 20 (Elijah), Luke iv. 22, broken off at οὐδεὶς αὐτῶν ver. 27.
On the fly-leaf we read Τὸ παρὸν θύον καὶ ἱερὸν εὐαγγέλιον ὑπάρχι κτήμα τοῦ
θήου καὶ ἁγίου ναοῦ τοῦ ἁγίου ἀποστώλου καὶ εὐαγγιλιστοῦ μάρκου καὶ εἰ τής ἀποξένοι
αὐτὸ ἐκ τοῦ ναοῦ ἔχαιτο τῶ ἐπιτίμω[-ιω?] τῶν ἁγ. <hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>πρων</hi>, with the date of
αχιθ (1619). (Greg. 236.)
</p>

<p>
230. Glasgow, Hunterian Museum V. 5. 10 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1259], 10-½ × 7-7/8,
ff. 112, 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> Belonged to Caesar de Missy. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 239.)
</p>

<p>
231. Glasg. Hunt. Mus. V. 3. 3 [xii or xiii], 10-¼ × 8-¼, ff. 251, 2 cols.
From the monastery of Πρόδρομος, given by Nicetas. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 240.)
</p>

<p>
232. (Apost. 44.) Glasg. Hunt. Mus. V. 4. 3, perhaps [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1199],
10-¾ × 8-¼, ff. 176 (26), 2 cols. Belonged once, like the two last, to De
Missy. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 241.)
</p>

<p>
The next two were collated by Scrivener&mdash;
</p>

<p>
*[+]233. P2<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>. Parham 66. 1 [ix], 10-½ × 7-5/8, three folio leaves from the
monastery of Docheiariou on Athos, containing the thirty-three verses,
Matt. i. 1-11; 11-22; vii. 7, 8; Mark ix. 41; xi. 22-26; Luke ix. 1-4.
(Greg. 182.)
</p>

<p>
*[+]234. P<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>, (or pa<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>.) Parham 83. 18 [June, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 980], 12-½ × 8-5/8,
ff. 222 (22), 2 cols., belonged to the late Lord de la Zouche, who brought
it from Caracalla on Athos in 1837, beautifully written at Ciscissa, in
Cappadocia Prima; a note dated 1049 is subjoined by a reviser, who
<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>
perhaps made the numerous changes in the text, and added two Lessons
in cursive letters. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Plate <ref target='Plate_XIII'>xiii</ref>, No. 36. Also <q>Cod. Augiens.,</q> Introd.,
pp. l-lv. (Greg. 181.)
</p>

<p>
235. Parham 84. 19 [xi], 14-½ × 11-½, ff. 188 (25), <q>the right royal
codex,</q> partly written in gold, perhaps by the Emperor Alexius Comnenus
(1081-1118). (Greg. 233.)
</p>

<p>
236. Parham 85. 20 [xii], 13-3/8 × 9-7/8, <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, brought from St. Saba
in 1834, must be on Scholz's list. (Greg. 344.)
</p>

<p>
237. Ashburnham 205 [xii], 10-3/8 × 7-¾, ff. 127, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, roughly
executed and apparently made up of several copies: seen by Coxe and
Burgon. (Greg. 237.) Loose in the book is:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
[+] 238. Ashburnham 208* [xiii], 10-¾ × 8-½, ff. 9, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, palimpsest, the
fragment of a menology for November and December. These were
purchased by the late Earl of Ashburnham at the sale of the library of
<q>Athenian Aberdeen,</q> who brought them from Greece. (Greg. 237<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
239. Burdett-Coutts I. 2. A fragment of 173 leaves [xiii], 10-¾ × 8-1/8,
one being on paper [xv] and 30 leaves palimpsest; having under the
Church Lessons, in leaning uncials of two columns [viii or ix], fragments
of legends relating to Saints in the menology, including the Apocryphal
ἀποδημία of Barnabas. <hi rend='italic'>Pict.</hi>, capitals in red ink. (Greg. 214.)
</p>

<p>
240. B.-C. I. 8 [xiii], 9-¾ × 7-3/8, is also a palimpsest, with uncial writing
in two columns (almost illegible) under the later Church Lessons on the
last leaf and the third, fourth, fifth, and seventh leaves from the end:
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at the thirteenth Sunday of St. Matthew, and ends in the tenth
εὐαγγέλιον ἀναστασιμόν John xxi. 3 (ἐνέβησαν).  (Greg. 215.)
</p>

<p>
241. B.-C. I. 23 [xiii], 9-¼ × 7-½, a poor copy; with illuminations, the
last leaf only being lost. (Greg. 217.)
</p>

<p>
242. B.-C. I. 24 [xiv], 12-½ × 10-1/8, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, complete, but the first leaf in
a later hand. (Greg. 218.)
</p>

<p>
243. B.-C. II. 5 [xi or xii], 11 × 8-3/8, a fine copy, with headings, &amp;c., in
gold, and red musical or tone notes. Begins John i. 17, thence complete
to the Lesson εἰς ἐπινίκια βασιλέων. At the end are nine later leaves.
(Greg. 219.)
</p>

<p>
244. B.-C. II. 16 [xiii], 8-3/8 x 6-½, a palimpsest, with only one column
on a page. Ends Luke ii. 59. (Greg. 220.)
</p>

<p>
245. B.-C. II. 30 [xiv], 11-3/8 × 7-½, on glazed paper, complete. Titles
and capitals in red. <hi rend='italic'>Syn.</hi> on a leaf of the binding. (Greg. 221.)
</p>

<p>
246. B.-C. III. 21 [xiii], <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, with illuminations. Ends in the
Lesson for Aug. 29, Mark vi. 22. (Greg. 222.)
</p>

<p>
247. B.-C. III. 34 [xiii], 10-¼ × 7-¾, neat and complete. A colophon
states the scribe to be Romanus, a priest. (Greg. 224.)
</p>

<p>
248. B.-C. III. 43 [April 28, 1437, Ind. 15], 11-½ × 8-3/8, ff. 206, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
(Greg. 225.)
</p>

<p>
[B.-C. III. 44 is Evst. 289, described below, Apost. 78.]
</p>

<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>

<p>
249. B.-C. III. 46 [xiv], 8-7/8 × 7-¼, ff. 220, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> in the beginning of the
Saints' Day Lessons: fifteen leaves are palimpsest, over writing full two
centuries earlier, containing in double columns Lessons of the Septuagint
from Genesis, Proverbs, and Isaiah. The other 205 leaves have only one
column on a page. (Greg. 226.)
</p>

<p>
250. B.-C. III. 52 [xiii, Greg. xiv], 9-¼ × 7-5/8, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, is but a fragment.
(Greg. 227.)
</p>

<p>
The following are Euchologies (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evet. 57), and are repeated among
the Lectionaries of the Apostolos:
</p>

<p>
251. (Apost. 64.) B.-C. I. 10 [xii or xiii], 7-3/8 × 4-3/8, ff. 60 (17), <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>,
wherein to the ordinary contents of a Euchology, and the Liturgies of
SS. Chrysostom, Basil, and Presanctified, are annexed Church Lessons in
a cramped and apparently later hand. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Scrivener, Critica Sacra.)
(Greg. 216.)
</p>

<p>
252. (Apost. 66.) B.-C. III. 29 [xiv or xv], 8-½ × 6, ff. 172, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>
Liturgies as in last, and other matter, on coarse paper, Lessons both from
the Gospels and Epistles. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Scrivener, Critica Sacra.) (Greg. 223.)
</p>

<p>
253. (Apost. 67.) B.-C. III. 42 [xiv], 6 × 4, ff. 310 (22), on stout glazed
paper, with the Liturgies as in Evst. 251, and much matter in various
hands, has fifteen Lessons from the Gospels, Acts, and Epistles, and three
from Isaiah, lxvi-lxviii. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Scrivener, Critica Sacra.) (Greg. 315.)
</p>

<p>
253<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>. (Apost. 68.) B.-C. III. 53 [xv], 8-½ × 5-¾, ff. 177 (26), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, rudely written with capitals in red. (Greg. 228.)
</p>

<p>
254. Coniston, John Ruskin [xiii or xiv, Greg. xi or xii], 12-3/8 × 10-¼,
ff. 144 (21), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, but well repaired. (Greg. 238.)
</p>

<p>
255. London, Brit. Mus. Egerton 2786 [xiii], 8-5/8 × 6, ff. 157 (20-27),
a palimpsest, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at the beginning (thirty-two leaves) and end, rather
rudely written in single columns, on coarse parchment, with vermilion
ornamentation. It abounds in uncouth <emph>itacisms</emph>. After Mr. Woodhouse's
death it belonged to Alderman Bragge from 1869 to 1876, then to
Dean Burgon, then to Rev. W. F. Rose. Bought in 1893. (Greg. 346.)
</p>

<p>
256. Lond. Brit. Mus. Arundel 536 [xiii], 9 × 6, ff. 217 (25), besides
3 at beginning, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, with Lections from the Epistles. (Greg.
187.)
</p>

<p>
*[+] 257. Lond. Brit. Mus. Arundel 547, is x<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> [ix], 11-½ × 9, ff. 329 (22),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at the end, but followed by a leaf
in a rather later hand, containing John viii. 12-19; 21-23. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> our
facsimile, Plate <ref target='Plate_VI'>vi</ref>. No. 16. A collation by Bentley is preserved at
Trinity College (B. xvii. 8). This is Hort's Cod. 38. (Greg. 183.)
</p>

<p>
258. (Apost. 53.) Lond. Brit. Mus. Harl. 5561 [xiv], 7-¼ × 5-½, ff. 276
(194 vell. + 82 [xv] <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>), is a Euchology (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evst. 57), containing
many short Lessons from the Gospels, Acts, and Epistles. (Greg. 340.)
</p>

<p>
259. Lond. Brit. Mus. Burney 22, is y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi> [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1319], 11-½ × 8-½, ff. 248
(27), 2 cols. (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> facsimile, Plate <ref target='Plate_XIII'>xiii</ref>, No. 37), remarkable for its wide
departures from the received text, and for that reason often cited by
Tischendorf and Alford on the Gospels. See also Westcott, in Smith's
<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>
Dictionary of the Bible, <q>New Testament.</q> Part of the first leaf
(John i. 11-13) is on paper and later: Evst. 257, 259 are described
in Scrivener's <q>Collations of the Holy Gospels,</q> Introd. pp. lix-lxiii.
Like Evst. 23 it was once D'Eon's. This is Hort's Cod. 39. (Greg.
184.)
</p>

<p>
260. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 5153 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1032], 10-½ × 7-½, 2 vols., ff. 141
and 133 (20), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, first five ff. vol. i. <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> and
damaged. (Greg. 188.)
</p>

<p>
261. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 11,840 [xii], 11 × 8-½, ff. 236 (22), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, from Bp. Butler's collection, a very fine specimen.
(Greg. 189.)
</p>

<p>
262. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 17,370 [xi], 12-3/8 × 9-¼, three leaves: one in
double columns (Matt. vi. 14-21), two in single columns [xiii ?] Luke
xxiv. 25-35; John i. 35-51. Sir F. Madden's note on the first fragment
is <q>Presented by Mr. Harris of Alexandria, June 28, 1848. A leaf of a
Greek Lectionary taken [<emph>by the Arabs</emph> deleted] out of a volume which
afterwards fell into the hands of Gen. Menou.</q> <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Act. 230. (Greg.
190.)
</p>

<p>
263. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 18,212 [xii], 11 × 8-¼, ff. 297 (21), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, much <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at the end, and an older leaf from the Old Testament
prefixed (Bloomfield). (Greg. 191.)
</p>

<p>
264. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 19,460 [xiii], 9-¼ × 7-¼, ff. 104 (31), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at the beginning and end, in coarse and very unusual black writing
(Bloomfield). (Greg. 192.)
</p>

<p>
265. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 19,737 [xiii], 12-¾ × 10, ff. 279 (23), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, bought at Sotheby's, 1854. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> at the end, with illuminations,
and frequent and beautiful gilt letters. (Greg. 318.)
</p>

<p>
266. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 19,993 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1335], 9-¾ × 7, ff. 281 (23),
in a bold hand and peculiar style. At the beginning is an Advertisement,
signed G. Alefson, which ends literally thus: <q>Je l'ai acheté seulement
pour le sauver des mains barbares qui allait le destruire intierement au
prix de sch. 15 a Chypre, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1851.</q> (Bloomfield.) (Greg. 193.)
</p>

<p>
267. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 21,260 [xiii], 12 × 10, ff. 360 (20), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, purchased of Messrs. Boone in 1856. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> at the end.
The first forty leaves of this splendid copy are injured by damp. (Greg.
319.)
</p>

<p>
268. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 21,261 [xiii], 8-½ × 5-¾, ff. 196 (19), written
by various hands. Purchased of Mr. H. Stevens, 1856. (Greg. 320.)
</p>

<p>
269. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 22,735 [xiii], 12-½ × 9-½, ff. 304 (<hi rend='italic'>sic</hi>),
(23), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, a fine, complete and interesting codex, bought
(like Evann. 596, 597) of Sp. P. Lampros of Athens in 1859: as were
also Evst. 270, 271, 272. Seven leaves of Patristic matter are bound up
with it at the end. (Greg. 321.)
</p>

<p>
270. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 22,742 [xiii], 11-½ × 8-¾, ff. 79 (24), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi> (later), rather old and much mutilated throughout. (Greg.
322.)
</p>

<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>

<p>
271. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 22,743 [xii ?], 14-½ × 9-½, ff. 213 (18),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>caps.</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi> in dull brown ink, somewhat roughly
executed, apparently written with a reed pen. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> The last leaf is
a fragment of Chrysostom, Hom. xlv, on Genesis. (Greg. 323.)
</p>

<p>
Evst. 265, 269, 271 sometimes agree with each other in departing
from the ordinary week-day Church Lessons, and suggest, as Dean
Burgon observes, some local fashion which is well worth investigating for
textual purposes. The student will have noticed, in our Table of Lessons
appended to Chap. III, how often two other codices, Apost. 64, or
B.-C. III. 24 and Evst. 253, or B.-C. III. 42, depart from the common
use of Church Lesson books, but only for the middle days of the week:
not, it would seem, for Saturdays and Sundays.
</p>

<p>
272. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 22,744 [xiii], 11 × 8-¼, ff. 189 (23), 2 cols.,
a beautiful copy, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at the beginning (to Sat. of third week), the end,
and elsewhere, with red musical notes. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Evst. 269. (Greg. 324.)
</p>

<p>
273. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 24,374 [xiii], 11-½ × 9, ff. 90 (18), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> (Greg. 325.)
</p>

<p>
274. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 24,377 [xiv and xii], 12 × 8-¾, ff. 350
(21), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, the first and some other leaves being lost; fol.
180, which is later, has palimpsest cursive writing under it. (Greg.
326.)
</p>

<p>
275. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 24,378 [xiii], 13 × 8-¾, ff. 270, 2 cols., part
of a Menaeum, in a small hand, written in a single column: imperfect
and damaged in places. (Greg. 927.)
</p>

<p>
276. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 24,379 [xiv], 14-¼ × 11, ff. 178 (28), 2 cols.,
much <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> throughout, with liturgical headings and some crosses in red
for stops. (Greg. 327.)
</p>

<p>
277. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 24,380 [xiv], 11 × 9, ff. 126, 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at beginning (to sixth day of seventh week) and end. (Greg.
328.)
</p>

<p>
Evst. 273-277 were purchased of H. Stanhope Freeman in 1862, as
was also Evan. 600.
</p>

<p>
278. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 27,860 [xi or xii], 8 × 5-½, ff. 115 (28),
2 cols., belonged to Sir F. Gage. (Greg. 329.)
</p>

<p>
279. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 28,817 [June 9, 1185], 11 × 8-¾, ff. 306
(21), 2 cols. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> throughout, clear, in fine condition and peculiar style.
(Greg. 330.) Like Evan. 603, bought in 1871 of Sir Ivor B. Guest, as
was
</p>

<p>
280. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 28,818 [July, 1272], 9-¾ × 7, ff. 118 (27),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, begins John xvii. 20. The subscription states that it was
written διὰ χειρὸς ἐμοῦ τοῦ ἁμαρτωλοῦ τολμῶ εἰπεῖν τοῦ ἱερέως τοῦ μεταξάρη.
(Greg. 331.)
</p>

<p>
*281. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 31,208 [xiii], 12-½ × 9-½, ff. 272 (21),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, bought of a dealer at Constantinople, cruelly mutilated
(eighty-four leaves being missing), but once very fine. Collated by the
Rev. W. F. Rose, who found it much to resemble Evst. 259 (y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>scr</hi>).
</p>

<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>

<p>
Burgon gives a French version of an Armenian note, dated 908 of the
Armenian era, or <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1460, of no special interest. (Greg. 333.)
</p>

<p>
282. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 31,919 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1431], 12-¾ × 10, ff. 108,
formerly Blenheim 3. D. 13, the uncial eighth century palimpsest of the
Gospels we have designated as Υ, contains Lessons from the Gospels,
written by Ignatius, Metropolitan of Selymbria in Thrace, being the
February portion of a Menaeum. (Greg. 334.)
</p>

<p>
283. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 31,920 [xi], 9-¼ × 8, ff. 226 (21), 2 cols.,
formerly Blenheim 3. C. 14, containing only σαββατοκυριακαί (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evst.
24), singularly unadorned, but very interesting and genuine. (Greg.
335.)
</p>

<p>
284. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 31,921 [xiii], 10 × 8, ff. 178 (24), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, formerly Blenheim 3. C. 13, with Church Lessons for
every day of the week. Several pages in a recent hand stand at the
beginning: the first hand commences Matt. vi. 31. (Greg. 336.)
</p>

<p>
285. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 31,949 [xiii], 11 × 8-½, ff. 103 (27), 2 cols.,
much dilapidated and <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, was a gift to the Museum. (Greg. 337.)
</p>

<p>
[+]286. Sinai, St. Catharine's, Golden Evst. [ix-xi], 11-¼ × 8-½ x 3-½, ff. abt.
200 (16), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <q>written in large and beautiful golden uncials,</q>
divided into <q>verses</q> like the modern, has breathings and accents. For
specimen of writing, &amp;c., <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Burgon, Aug. 9, 1882. It was seen in
1862 by Burgon, in 1864 by the Rev. E. M. Young, and Mr. Jo. Dury
Geden (<hi rend='italic'>Athenaeum</hi>, Nov. 12 and 19, 1864). It is said to be deteriorated
by the promiscuous handling of strangers, although E. A. Sophocles tells
us that local tradition absurdly assigns it to the Emperor Theodosius
[d. 395] as the actual scribe; unless, as Mr. Geden suggests, Theodosius III
(<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 716) be meant. The volume opens with the Gospels for the first
five days of Easter week, which are followed by about sixty-five more
from other parts of the yearly services. (Greg. 300.)
</p>

<p>
*287. (Act. 42, Apost. 56) contains only Matt. xvii. 16-23. (Greg.
923.)
</p>

<p>
288. Oxf. Bodl. Misc. Gr. 307 [xii], 12 × 9-½, ff. 335 (22), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, very beautiful. Mr. Madan of the Bodleian transcribed
a note on the last leaf, showing that it once belonged to the Palaeologi.
(Greg. 341.)
</p>

<p>
289. Oxf. Bodl. Misc. Gr. 308, from Constantinople [xii or xiii],
11-½ × 9-¼, ff. 217 (21), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> Initial letters of Byzantine
character, σαββατοκυριακαί (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evst. 24), has lost a very few lines at
the end. (Greg. 342.)
</p>

<p>
290. (Apost. 78.) (Greg. 476.)
</p>

<p>
291. Camb. Univ. Libr. Add. 679. 1 [xii], 10 × 8-¼, ff. 170 (18), being
a companion book to Apost. 79, containing only the week-day Lessons,
except that two sets belong to Saturday and Sunday. Begins Matt. vii.
10, being on the sixth day of the first week of that Evangelist. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi>
elsewhere, but the end complete with a colophon, and fragments of two
additional leaves. Initial capitals in red. (Greg. 305.)
</p>

<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>

<p>
292. (Apost. 80.) Camb. Univ. Libr. Add. 1836 [xiii], 6-½ × 5-¼, ff.
(185 - 54 = ) 131 (17), <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi> Sunday and two Saturday Lessons only
for Epistles and Gospels. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> first fifty and four other leaves. Begins
second Sunday in St. Matthew (iv. 23). <hi rend='italic'>Men.</hi> full, followed by two
Epistles and Gospels as ἀκολουθία εἰς ὁσίους. Additional Lessons in another
hand are inserted about the season of Epiphany. (Greg. 306.)
</p>

<p>
293. Camb. Univ. Libr. Add. 1839 [xii or xiii], 10 × 7-½, ff. (192 - 88 = )
104 (17), 2 cols.: σαββατοκυριακαί only (see Evst. 24). <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> first seventy-seven
and ten other leaves. Begins sixth Sunday of St. Luke (viii. 39).
<hi rend='italic'>Men.</hi> ending Dec. 26. (Greg. 307.)
</p>

<p>
294. Camb. Univ. Libr. Add. 1840 [xi or xii], 11-½ × 8-½, ff. 112 (31),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi> From the eleventh Sunday of St. Luke downwards
the week-day Lessons are omitted. <hi rend='italic'>Men.</hi> followed by Gospels for
several occasions. The arrangement of the week-day Lessons in the
Gospels of St. Matthew, St. Mark, and St. Luke differs much from that
usually found, though fundamentally akin to it. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> at the end and
many other leaves. (Greg. 308.)
</p>

<p>
[+]295. Camb. Univ. Libr. Add. 1879. 2 [x], 11-¾ × 7-7/8, ff. 8 (22), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi> Σαββατοκυριακαί from eleventh Sunday in St. Luke
(xiv. 20) to Sunday of the Publican (xviii. 14). Evst. 295-7 are from
Tischendorf's collection. (Greg. 309.)
</p>

<p>
296. Camb. Univ. Libr. Add. 1879. 12 [xi or xii], 9-½ × 6-¼, ff. 4 (25),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>, containing from sixth Saturday in Lent (John xi. 41) to
Liturgy for Palm Sunday (John xii. 11), and part of Matins (from Matt.
xxi. 36) and Vespers (to Matt. xxiv. 26) for Monday in Holy Week.
(Greg. 310.)
</p>

<p>
297. Camb. Univ. Libr. Add. 1879. 13 [xii], 10 × 8-½, ff. 4, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>,
2 cols., Greek and Arabic, being only the upper part of four leaves of
σαββατοκυριακαί in fifth and sixth Sundays of St. Luke (ch. xvi. 24 f.; 28-30;
viii. 16-18; 21; 27; 29 f.; 32-34; 38 f.). (Greg. 311.)
</p>

<p>
298. Oxf. Keble Coll. [xiii], 9-¾ × 6-¾, ff. 151 (25), 2 cols., some <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>, presented in 1882 by Mr. Greville Chester, beginning
with the Lesson for the second day of the fifth week after Easter, and
ending with the Lesson for St. Helena's day, May 21. (Greg. 343.)
</p>

<p>
[+]299. Par. Nat. Gr. 975. B [x], 12-½ × 9-½, ff. 55 (22), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, palimpsest, frag. of St. Luke, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> ff. 33, 34, 39, 40 [ix],
Chrys. and Zosimus. (See Greg. 363.)
</p>

<p>
300. Messina, Univ. 65 [xii], 13-¾ × 10-½, ff. 318 (25), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi> (Greg. 513.)
</p>

<p>
[+]301. Mess. Univ. 66 [ix], 13-7/8 × 9-5/8, ff. 256 (28), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> (Greg. 514.)
</p>

<p>
302. Mess. Univ. 75 [xiii], 12-¼ × 9-½, ff. 136 (22), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at beginning and end. (Greg. 516.)
</p>

<p>
303. Mess. Univ. 96 [xii], 10-½ × 7-7/8, ff. 298 (24), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>
(Greg. 519.)
</p>

<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>

<p>
304. Mess. Univ. 98 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1148], 10-5/8 × 8-½, ff. 275 (24), 2 cols. (Greg.
520.)
</p>

<p>
305. Mess. Univ. 73 [xii], 12-7/8 × 9-7/8, ff. 223 (28), 2 cols., written at
Messina by Nilus the monk in the monastery of St. Salvador: he records
(at p. 26<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>) the earthquake which happened Sept. 26, 1173, Codex
Graeco-Siculus. (Greg. 515.)
</p>

<p>
306. Mess. Univ. 58 [xiv, Greg. xv or xvi], 11-1/8 × 8-1/8, ff. 236 (17),
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, written by three different calligraphers. (Greg. 512.)
</p>

<p>
307. Mess. Univ. 94 [xii], 10-½ × 7-¾, ff. 184 (21), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at beginning, breaking off at Sept. 24 in the menology. (Greg.
517.)
</p>

<p>
308. Mess. Univ. 111 [xii], 9-½ × 8, ff. 119 (23), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at beginning
and end. (Greg. 521.)
</p>

<p>
309. Mess. Univ. 112 [xii], 9-½ × 7-½, ff. 146 (21), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at beginning and end. (Greg. 522.)
</p>

<p>
310. Mess. Univ. 170 [xii], 8-5/8 × 6-¼, ff. 187 (20), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at beginning
and end. (Greg. 524.)
</p>

<p>
311. Mess. Univ. 95 [xiii], 11-¼ × 8-1/8, ff. 186 (23), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> from pp. 42-75. (Greg. 518.)
</p>

<p>
312. (Apost. 112.) Mess. Univ. 150 [xii or xiii], 6-½ × 5-¼, ff. 60 (22).
A fragment. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 523.)
</p>

<p>
313. Crypta Ferrata, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.</hi> a. 7 [xii], 9-7/8 × 7-7/8, ff. 45 (25), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.
nigr.</hi>, σαββατοκυριακαί mutilated. (Greg. 463.)
</p>

<p>
314. Crypt. Ferr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.</hi> a. 9 [xii], 13-3/8 × 9-7/8, ff. 292 (25), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, a beautiful codex, and very full in its Lections. (Greg.
464.)
</p>

<p>
315. Crypt. Ferr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>a.</hi> 10 [xi], 12-7/8 × 10-¼, ff. 246 (22), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi>, much foreign matter, a very beautiful codex. (Greg. 465.)
</p>

<p>
316. Crypt. Ferr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>a.</hi> 11 [xv], 6-¼ × 4-7/8, ff. 181 (14), <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> σαββατοκυρ.
(Greg. 466.)
</p>

<p>
317. Crypt. Ferr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>a.</hi> 12 [xiv, Greg. x or xi], 6-3/8 × 4-¾, ff. 97 (22),
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> (Greg. 467.)
</p>

<p>
318. Crypt. Ferr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>a.</hi> 13 [xv], 6-3/8 × 4-7/8, ff. 62 (18), partly palimpsest,
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> (Greg. 468.)
</p>

<p>
319. Crypt. Ferr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>a.</hi> 14 [xii], 9-½ × 6-¾, ff. 73 (23), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at
beginning and end. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 469.)
</p>

<p>
320. Crypt. Ferr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>a.</hi> 15 [xi], 7-1/8 × 5-7/8, ff. 69 (23). Closely resembles
Evst. 33. (Greg. 470.)
</p>

<p>
321. Crypt. Ferr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>a.</hi> 16 [xi], 7-7/8 x 5-7/8, ff. 55 (26), 2 cols., a fragment
from St. John. (Greg. 471.)
</p>

<p>
322. (Apost. 90.) Crypt. Ferr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.</hi> β. 2 [xi], 5-7/8 × 4, ff. 259 (ff. 159-213),
with many excerpts from Fathers. (Greg. 478.)
</p>

<p>
323. (Apost. 90.) Crypt. Ferr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.</hi> δ. 2 [x], 5-7/8 × 4-3/8, ff. 155, much from
Old Testament, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> (Greg. 473.)
</p>

<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>

<p>
[+]324. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 805, ff. 1-7 [ix], 11-1/8 × 8-1/8, ff. 7(19),
<hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, palimpsest, <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, fragm. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 370.)
</p>

<p>
325. (Apost. 92.) Crypt. Ferr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>. δ. 4 [xiii], 9-7/8 × 7-1/8, ff. 257. Written
by <q>Johannes Rossanensis.</q> Contains Lections from Old and New Testaments.
(Greg. 475.)
</p>

<p>
326. St. Saba 25 [xi], fol. Coxe. (Greg. 170.)
</p>

<p>
327. St. Saba 26 [xi], fol. Coxe.
</p>

<p>
328. St. Saba 40 [xii], fol. In Greek and Arabic. Coxe.
</p>

<p>
329. St. Saba 44 [xii], 4to. Coxe.
</p>

<p>
330. Crypt. Ferr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.</hi> δ. 11 [three fragments]:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
(1) [xi], 9-¾ × 7-½, ff. 2 (22), 2 cols.;
</p>

<p>
(2) [xii], 6-¼ × 4-5/8, ff. 2(23);
</p>

<p>
(3) [xiii], 8-5/8 × 6-¾, ff. 4 (22), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 472.)
</p>

<p>
331. Crypt. Ferr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.</hi> δ. 16 [x], 9-½ × 7-1/8, ff. 234 (25), 2 cols., palimpsest.
(Greg. 480.)
</p>

<p>
[+]332. Crypt. Ferr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.</hi> δ. 17 [x], 7-7/8 × 5-7/8, ff. 25 (27), <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, palimpsest,
fragm. (Greg. 481.)
</p>

<p>
[+]333. Crypt. Ferr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.</hi> δ. 19 [x], 7-½ × 5-1/8, ff. 39 (24), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>,
palimpsest, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> (Greg. 482.)
</p>

<p>
334. (Apost. 95.) Crypt. Ferr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.</hi> δ. 20 [xii, Greg. x or xi], 9 × 6-¾,
ff. 21 (22), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> (Greg. 483.)
</p>

<p>
335. Crypt. Ferr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.</hi> δ. 21 [x], 13 × 9, ff. 97 (31), palimpsest, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
(Greg. 484.)
</p>

<p>
336. Crypt. Ferr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.</hi> δ. 22 [x or xi],  6-¾ × 5-½, ff. 113, 2 cols., palimpsest,
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> (Greg. 485.)
</p>

<p>
[+]337. (Apost. 96.) Crypt. Ferr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.</hi> δ. 24 [four fragments]:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
(1) Also called Ζ´. α´. 2 [xiii], 9-¾ × 6-¾, ff. 2 (28), 2 cols.;
</p>

<p>
(2) Also Β´. α´. 23 [viii or ix], 7-7/8 × 5-1/8, palimpsest, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, ff. 2
(27), 2 cols.;
</p>

<p>
(3) Also Ζ´. α´. 24 (R paul.);
</p>

<p>
(4) Also Γ. Β´. 3 [xi], 7-3/8 × 5-½. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> also 340. (Greg. 486<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a-d</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
338. Crypt. Ferr. Γ. α. 18 [xvii], 10-¼ × 7-7/8, ff. 170, Evangelia ἑωθινά.
(Greg. 487.)
</p>

<p>
339. (Apost. 97.) Crypt. Ferr. Γ. β. 2 [xi], 6-¾ × 5-1/8, ff. 151, a
Euchology, contains only a few Lections. (Greg. 488.)
</p>

<p>
340. (Apost. 98.) Crypt. Ferr. Γ. β. 3 [xiv], 7-3/8 x 5-½, ff. 201 (19),
Euchology. Contains only a few Lessons. (Greg. 486<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d2</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
341. (Apost. 99.) Crypt. Ferr. Γ. β. 6 [xiii or xiv], 7-1/8 × 4-¾, ff. 101
(21). Contains only a few Lections. (Greg. 489.)
</p>

<p>
342. Crypt. Ferr. Γ. β. 7 [ix or x], 6-¾ × 5-½, ff. 173 (17), Euchology.
Contains only a few Lections. (Greg. 490.)
</p>

<p>
343. Crypt. Ferr. Γ. β. 8 [Greg. xiii], ff. 8 palimpsest at end of ff. 145
[xii]. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 491.)
</p>

<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>

<p>
344. (Apost. 100.) Crypt. Ferr. Γ. β. 9 [xvi], 4-¼ × 3-1/8, ff. 95, Euchology.
Contains only a few Lections. (Greg. 492.)
</p>

<p>
345. Crypt. Ferr. Γ. β. 11 [xii], 5-½ × 4-¾, ff. 20, Euchology. Contains
only a few Lections. (Greg. 493.)
</p>

<p>
346. (Apost. 101.) Crypt. Ferr. Γ. β. 12 [xiv], 5-7/8 × 4-¾, ff. 98, Euchology.
Contains only a few Lections. (Greg. 494.)
</p>

<p>
347. (Apost. 102.) Crypt. Ferr. Γ. β. 13 [xiii], 9 × 6-¼, ff. 118 (18),
Euchology. Written by <q>Johannes Rossanensis.</q> (Greg. 495.)
</p>

<p>
348. Crypt. Ferr. Γ. β. 14 [xiii], 7-½ x 5-½, ff. 54 (23). Euchologium
with a few Lections. (Greg. 496.)
</p>

<p>
349. (Apost. 103.) Crypt. Ferr. Γ. β. 15 [xi-xiii], 7-1/8 × 5-1/8, ff. 41
(22), Euchology. Contains only a few Lections. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 497.)
</p>

<p>
350. (Apost. 104.) Crypt. Ferr. Γ. β. 17 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1565], 8-¼ × 5-7/8, ff. 269
(21), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> The Saturday and Sunday Lessons begin at fol. 121. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi>
Greg. 498.)
</p>

<p>
351. (Apost. 105.) Crypt. Ferr. Γ. β. 18 [xiv], St. Saba 55 [xii], 4to.
Coxe. Contains very few Lections.
</p>

<p>
352. (Apost. 106.) Crypt. Ferr. Γ. β. 19 [xvi], 11-3/8 × 8-¼, ff. 145 (28),
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> The Apostolo-Evangeliarium begins at fol. 16. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 500.)
</p>

<p>
353. (Apost. 107.) Crypt. Ferr. Γ. β. 23 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1641], 12-½ × 8-5/8, ff. 75.
It is a Euchologium with a few Lections. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 501.)
</p>

<p>
354. (Apost. 108.) Crypt. Ferr. Γ. β. 24 [xvi], 12-½ × 9, ff. 302 (28),
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> Liturgical information. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 502.)
</p>

<p>
355. Crypt. Ferr. Γ. β. 35 [xiii], 7-1/8 × 5-7/8, ff. 83 (21), liturgical. Contains
only a few Lections. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 503.)
</p>

<p>
356. (Apost. 109.) Crypt. Ferr. Γ. β. 38 [xvii], 11-¾ × 8-5/8, ff. 91. Contains
only a few Lections. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 504.)
</p>

<p>
357. (Apost. 110.) Crypt. Ferr. Γ. β. 13 [xvi], 10-¼ × 7-½, ff. 344,
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, liturgical. (Greg. 505.)
</p>

<p>
358. (Apost. 111.) Crypt. Ferr. Δ. β. 22 [xviii], 15-5/8 × 10-5/8, ff. 77
(27), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> Contains only a few Lections. (Greg. 506.)
</p>

<p>
359. Crypt. Ferr. Δ. γ. 26 [xiv], 4-¼ × 3-1/8, ff. 115 (19). The Evangelia
[ἑωθινά]. (Greg. 507.)
</p>

<p>
360. Crypt. Ferr. Δ. δ. 6 [xviii], 16 x 10-5/8, ff. ?, palimpsest. Fragments.
(<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 508.)
</p>

<p>
361. St. Saba, Tower Library 12 [xi], 4to. Coxe.
</p>

<p>
362. Syracuse <q>Seminario</q> 3 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1125], 8-3/8 × 5-½, ff. 255 (25), 2 cols.
(Greg. 574.)
</p>

<p>
363. Lond. Lambeth 1194 [xiii, Greg. xi], 7-½ × 5-½, ff. 218 (17), fifty-one
Lessons from Gospels&mdash;forty-eight from Acts and Epistles, <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> Menaeum ending in June. (Greg. 477.)
</p>

<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>

<p>
364. St. Saba, Tower 16 [xii], 4to, with Lections from Old Testament.
Coxe.
</p>

<p>
365. St. Saba, Tower 52 [xi], 4to, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi> Coxe.
</p>

<p>
366. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 74 [xiv or xv, Greg. xii], 7-¾ × 5-3/8, ff. 72,
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi> Formerly Huet's, who gave it to the Jesuits.
Contains the Evangelia ἑωθινά. It is rather a Euchologium, and is of
little value. (Greg. 366.)
</p>

<p>
[+]367. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 567 [xv], 13 × 10, ff. 173 (14), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>,
apparently modern. Given by the same to the library. Saturday and
Sunday Lections. (Greg. 367.)
</p>

<p>
368. Berlin, Reg. Gr. <q>Hamilton 245</q> [x, Greg. xii], 12-7/8 × 9-3/8, ff. 378
(21), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> A magnificent specimen. (Greg. 381.)
</p>

<p>
369. Berlin, Reg. Gr. <q>Hamilton 246</q> [xiii], 13-1/8 × 10-1/8, ff. ?, 2 cols.
At the beginning of the volume is a fragment of a more ancient Evangelium,
not extending beyond the Eusebian tables of Canons, superbly
illuminated. (Greg. 382.)
</p>

<p>
370. Berlin, Reg. Gr. 51 fol. [xiii, Greg. xii], 12-5/8 × 9-½, ff. 214 (26),
2 cols. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 375.)
</p>

<p>
371. Berlin, Reg. Gr. 52 fol. [xii], 11-5/8 × 9, <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi> (Greg. 376.)
</p>

<p>
372. Berlin, Reg. Gr. 53 fol. [xii, Greg. xi], 11-¾ × 8-¾, ff. 248 (21),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 377.)
</p>

<p>
373. Berlin, Reg. Gr. 4to, 46 [xiii, Greg. xii], 10-¾ x 8, ff. 46, 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, ends with the Saturday of Pentecost. (Greg. 378.)
</p>

<p>
374. Berlin, Reg. Gr. 4to, 61 [xiii], 11-½ × 8-½, <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, begins with
the Saturday after Pentecost, and contains the Menologium. (Greg.
379.)
</p>

<p>
375. Berlin, Reg. Gr. 4to, 64 [xii, xiii], 10-½ × 8-1/8, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at the commencement.
(Greg. 380.)
</p>

<p>
376. Rom. Vat. Gr. 352 [xi, Greg. xiii or xvi], 12-½ × 9-3/8, ff. 244 (23),
2 cols., with Menology. (Greg. 540.)
</p>

<p>
[+]377. Rom. Vat. Gr. 353 [x], 11-5/8 × 8-1/8, ff. 237 (20), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>
Gospel Lections. (Greg. 541.)
</p>

<p>
[+]378. Rom. Vat. Gr. 355 [x], 13 × 10-1/8, ff. 315 (19), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>
(Greg. 542.)
</p>

<p>
[+]379. Rom. Vat. Gr. 357 [x], 15-3/8 × 12-¾, ff. 322 (15), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi> (Greg. 543.)
</p>

<p>
380. Rom. Vat. Gr. 362 [x, Greg. xi], 7-¾ × 5-7/8, ff. 200 (23). (Greg.
544.)
</p>

<p>
381. Rom. Vat. Gr. 540 [x], fol., ff. 4 (20), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, a fragment
prefixed to St. Chrysostom on St. John. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 545.)
</p>

<p>
382. Rom. Vat. Gr. 781 [xii, Greg. x or xi], 9-7/8 × 7-½, ff. 152 (27),
2 cols., <q>fuit Blasii praep. Cryptae Ferratae.</q> (Greg. 546.)
</p>

<p>
383. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1534 [xiii or xiv], 13-¼ × 10-½, ff. 223 (25), 2 cols.
(Greg. 549.)
</p>

<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>

<p>
384. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1601 [xiii, Greg. xii], 9-3/8 × 7-¼, ff. 193 (22), 2 cols.
(Greg. 550.)
</p>

<p>
385. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1813 [xiii], 7-1/8 × 5-¼, ff. out of 266 - 3 (19). Evangelia
ἑωθινά. (Greg. 552.)
</p>

<p>
386. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1886 [xiii], 10 × 7-¾, ff. 110 (29), 2 cols. (Greg.
553.)
</p>

<p>
387. (Apost. 118.) Rom. Vat. Gr. 2012 [xv], ff. 211. Contains only
a few Gospel Lections. (Greg. 556.)
</p>

<p>
388. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2100 [xiv], 7 × 5-¼, ff. 79 (19), with a commentary.
(Greg. 560.)
</p>

<p>
389. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2129 [xv, Greg. xiv], <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, ff. 5 out of 701.
Lections during Lent. (Greg. 561.)
</p>

<p>
[+]390. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2144 [viii], 8-¼ × 5-5/8, ff. 193 (22), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>
Brought from Constantinople. (Greg. 563.)
</p>

<p>
[+]391. Patmos 4 [xi], 4to, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi> Coxe. (Greg. ?)
</p>

<p>
392. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2167 [xiii], 12-¼ × 9, ff. 361 (21), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
Olim <q>Columnensis.</q> (Greg. 564.)
</p>

<p>
[+]393. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2251 [viii ?], 8-¼ × 5-½ ff. 4 (22), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>
Olim <q>Columnensis.</q> At the beginning and end of a larger MS. (Greg.
565.)
</p>

<p>
394. Rom. Vat. Alex. Gr. 44 [xvii], 8-¼ × 5-7/8, ff. 355 (20), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, by
different hands, with a commentary. (Greg. 571.)
</p>

<p>
395. (Apost. 121.) Rom. Vat. Alex. Gr. 59 [xii], 11 × 7-¾, ff. 137 (47).
Gospels and Epistles for Holy Week. Lections from Old and New Test.
(Greg. 573.)
</p>

<p>
[+]396. Rom. Vat. Ottob. Gr. 444 A, B [ix], 10 × 7-3/8, ff. 2 (22), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, with fragments of Gospels. (Greg. 566.)
</p>

<p>
[+]397. Rom. Vat. Palat. Gr. 1. A [ix or x], 10-¼ × 7-5/8, ff. 2 (23), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi> A mere fragment. (Greg. 567.)
</p>

<p>
398. Rom. Vat. Palat. Gr. 221 [xiii, Greg. xv], 9-5/8 × 4-1/8 (?), ff. 397 (32),
<hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, with the commentary of Xiphilinus. (Greg. 568.)
</p>

<p>
399. Rom. Vat. Palat. Gr. 239 [xv, Greg. xvi], 8-¾ × 5-¾, ff. 122 (?)
(23), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, with a commentary. (Greg. 569.)
</p>

<p>
[+]400. Patmos 10 [xi], 4to, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi> Coxe. (Greg. ?)
</p>

<p>
[+]401. Patmos 22 [xi], fol., <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi> Coxe. (Greg. ?)
</p>

<p>
[+]402. Patmos 81 [viii], 4to, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi> Coxe. (Greg. ?)
</p>

<p>
403. Rom. Barberini iv. 43 [xii, Greg. xiii or xiv], 9-½ × 7-¼, ff. 221
(23), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, beautifully illuminated. (Greg. 535.)
</p>

<p>
404. Rom. Barb. iv. 30 [xii], 9 × 7, ff. 223 (22), 2 cols. (Greg. 534.)
</p>

<p>
405. Rom. Barb. iv. 53 [xiii, Greg. xi or xii], 9-¾ × 7-½, ff. 161 (22),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> (Greg. 536.)
</p>

<p>
406. Rom. Barb. iv. 13 [xii], ff. 143. Contains only a few Lections.
(Greg. 531.)
</p>

<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>

<p>
407. Rom. Barb. iv. 25 [xiv, Greg. xi or xii], 9 × 5-¾, ff. 159. Contains
only certain Lections. (Greg. 532.)
</p>

<p>
408. (Apost. 218.) Rom. Barb. iv. 1 [xiv-xvi], ff. 323, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> Contains
only a few Lections. (Greg. 530.)
</p>

<p>
409. Rom. Barb. iii. 22 [xv], ff. 254, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> Contains only a few
Lections. (Greg. 528.)
</p>

<p>
410. (Apost. 124.) Rom. Barb. iii. 129 [xiv], ff. 189. (Greg. 529.)
</p>

<p>
411. Rom. Barb. vi. 18 [xii], 12-3/8 × 10-3/8, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, but beautifully illuminated
with Menology. (Greg. 537.)
</p>

<p>
412. Milos [xii], fol., a fragment. Coxe. (Greg. 804.)
</p>

<p>
413. Constantinople, Patriarch of Jerusalem 10 [xii], 4to, a palimpsest
written over a geometrical treatise [xi]. Coxe.
</p>

<p>
[+]414. Rom. Ghig. R. vii. 52 [ix, Greg. x or xi], 11-¾ × 9-3/8, ff. 227 (12),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <q>cod. nobilissimus, charact. uncialibus: habet titulum
<hi rend='italic'>Hebdomadae magnae Officium Graecorum</hi>: e CP. advectus est ad Conventum
Collis Paradisi, et hinc ad Bibliothecam Chisianam.</q> (Greg. 538.)
</p>

<p>
415. (Apost. 256.) Par. Nat. 13 [xii-xiii, Greg. xi or xii], 15-5/8 × 11-¾,
ff. 478 (68), 2 cols. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Martin, p. 165. (Greg. 935.)
</p>

<p>
416. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 24 [xiii], 13 × 9-¾, ff. 339 (22), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Martin, p. 165. (Greg. 364.)
</p>

<p>
417. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 29 [xii], 9-¾ × 7-5/8, ff. 198 (20), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Martin, p. 165. (Greg. 365.)
</p>

<p>
418. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 179, 180 [xiii], 9-¼ × 5-7/8, f. 1 (26). <hi rend='italic'>See</hi>
Martin, p. 166. (Greg. 928.)
</p>

<p>
419. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 1096 [xiii-xiv], 7-¼ × 5-¼, ff. 33 (26), <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>
(Greg. 374.)
</p>

<p>
420. Auckland, City Library. (Greg. 474.)
</p>

<p>
[+]421. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 686 [xi, Greg. ix], 11-¾ × 9, ff. 2 (21), 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi> Martin, p. 167. (Greg. 368.)
</p>

<p>
422. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 687 [xii], 13-½ × 10-1/8, ff. 2 (20), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi> Martin, p. 167. (Greg. 499.)
</p>

<p>
423. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 758 [xii], 11 × 8-5/8, ff. 111 (28), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi> Martin, p. 167. (Greg. 369.)
</p>

<p>
424. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 834 [xiii], 11-5/8 × 9, ff. 90 (27), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi> Martin, p. 168. (Greg. 371.)
</p>

<p>
425. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 905 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1055 ?], 11-7/8 × 9-¾, ff. 254 (20),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> Martin, p. 168. (Greg. 372.)
</p>

<p>
426. Par. Nat. Gr. 235 [xii], 12-3/8 × 10, ff. 235 (24), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, greatly <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> Martin, p. 168. (Greg. 361.)
</p>

<p>
[+]427. Par. Nat. Gr. 228, Greg. 928 [ix], 11-½ × 8-½, ff. 240 (20), 2 cols.,
palimpsest with menaeum [xii-xiii] written over, 2 ff. at beginning, and
11 after p. 48, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> and later, <hi rend='italic'>Am.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi> Martin, p. 169. (Greg. 362.)
</p>

<p>
428. (Apost. 257.) Par. Nat. Gr. 263 [xiii], 15 × 10-7/8, ff. 200 (62),
<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at end. Came from Mon. of Panteleemon at Athos. Martin,
p. 170. (Greg. 936.)
</p>

<p>
For the rest, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Gregory, pp. 744, &amp;c. The press-marks in the
Athenian MSS. have been changed since Dr. Gregory examined them.
I have had great difficulty in identifying them, and am in doubt as to
many where a (?) is inserted. The figures in brackets are the present
press-marks. Dr. Gregory's are given first.
</p>

<p>
429. Athens, Nat. Libr. 12 (66 ?) [xi], 11-¾ × 9-½, ff. 196.
</p>

<p>
430. Ath. Nat. 13 (70 ?) [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1350], 12-½ × 9, ff. 199, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
431. Ath. Nat. 13 (146 ?) [xv], 11 × 9-½, ff. 174, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
</p>

<p>
432. Ath. Nat. 15 (64 ?), 13-3/8 × 9-½, ff. 287, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at end.
</p>

<p>
433. Ath. Nat. 17 (82) [xii], 9 × 7-1/8, ff. 139, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at end.
</p>

<p>
434. Ath. Nat. 18 (68 ?) [xii], 11 × 9, ff. 220, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at end.
</p>

<p>
435. Ath. Nat. 19 (79) [xiv], 8-5/8 × 7-1/8, ff. 191.
</p>

<p>
436. Ath. Nat. 19 (73) [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1545], 12-½ × 8-¼, ff. 314 (? 251 + 63
later).
</p>

<p>
437. Ath. Nat. 24 (67 ?) [x], 11 x 9, ff. 260, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>
</p>

<p>
438. Ath. Nat. 25 (112 ?) [xv], 7-½ × 5-½, ff. 119.
</p>

<p>
439. (Apost. 193.) Ath. Nat. 66 (670 ?) [xii], 8-¼ × 5-7/8, ff. 132, Euchology
followed by Apostoloeuaggelia.
</p>

<p>
440. (Apost. 194.) Ath. Nat. 112 (126) [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1504], 8-¼ × 5-7/8, ff. 276.
</p>

<p>
441. Ath. Nat. (69) [xii], 11-3/8 × 8-5/8, ff. 200, the last three blank.
</p>

<p>
442. Ath. Nat. (63 ?) [x end], 11-¾ × 9-½, ff. 294.
</p>

<p>
443. (Apost. 195.) Ath. Nat. 86. I cannot find this, which is
a menaeum, or the two next.
</p>

<p>
[+]444<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>. Ath. Nat. ?
</p>

<p>
444<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>. Ath. Nat. ?
</p>

<p>
445. Ath. Nat. (84 ?) [xiv], 11-3/8 × 8-5/8, ff. 148.
</p>

<p>
446. (Apost. 196.) Ath. Nat. (661 ?) [xv], 7-7/8 × 6-3/8, ff. 138. Liturgical
matter followed by Apostoloeuaggelia.
</p>

<p>
447. Ath. Nat. (85 ?) [xiv], 11 × 7-7/8, ff. 102.
</p>

<p>
448. Ath. Nat. 124 [xii], 10-5/8 × 8-5/8, ff. 174, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>
</p>

<p>
449. Ath. Nat. (62 ?) [xii], 11-¾ × 9, ff. 329, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>
</p>

<p>
450. Ath. τῆς Βουλῆς.
</p>

<p>
451. Ath. M. Bournias.
</p>

<p>
452<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>. Ath. M. Bournias.
</p>

<p>
452<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>. Ath. M. Bournias.
</p>

<p>
453. Ath. M. Varouccas.
</p>

<p>
454. Dublin, Trin. Coll. A. i. 8, fol. 1.
</p>

<p>
455. Toledo, Conv. Canon. arm. 31, no. 31.
</p>

<p>
456. Corcyra, Abp. Eustathius.
</p>

<p>
457. Corcyra, Abp. Eustathius.
</p>

<p>
458. Corcyra, Abp. Eustathius.
</p>

<p>
459. Corcyra, M. Eleutherius.
</p>

<p>
460. Corcyra, M. Eleutherius.
</p>

<p>
461. Corcyra, M. Eleutherius.
</p>

<p>
462. Corcyra, M. Arist. St. Varouccas.
</p>

<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>

<p>
463. Andover, Mass. U.S.A., Theol. Seminary 1 [xv or xiv], 8-¼ × 6,
ff. 194 (24), (26 (?) <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>), part palimpsest. Hoskier. (Greg. 180.)
</p>

<p>
464. Athos, Simopetra 148. (Greg. 479.)
</p>

<p>
[+]465. Moscow, Syn. 313 (ol. 300). (Greg. 242.)
</p>

<p>
[+]466. Petersburg, Caes. Muralt. 21 (69). (Greg. 243.)
</p>

<p>
[+]467. Petersburg, Caes. Mur. 35. (Greg. 244.)
</p>

<p>
[+]468. Petersburg, Caes. Mur. 36. (Greg. 245<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
[+]469. Petersburg, Caes. Mur. 37. (Greg. 245<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
470. Petersburg, Caes. Mur. 40. (Greg. 247.)
</p>

<p>
471. Petersburg, Caes. Mur. 43. (Greg. 248.)
</p>

<p>
472. Petersburg, Caes. Mur. 55. (Greg. 250.)
</p>

<p>
473. Petersburg, Caes. Mur. 69. (Greg. 252.)
</p>

<p>
474. Petersburg, Caes. Mur. 80. (Greg. 254.)
</p>

<p>
475. Petersburg, Caes. Mur. 84. (Greg. 255.)
</p>

<p>
476. Petersburg, Caes. Mur. 37<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>. (Greg. 257.)
</p>

<p>
477. Petersburg, Caes. Mur. 112. (Greg. 259.)
</p>

<p>
478. Venice, St. Mark ii. 17. (Greg. 273.)
</p>

<p>
479. Venice, St. Mark ii. 143. (Greg. 274.)
</p>

<p>
480. Milan, Ambr. E. 101 sup. (Greg. 286.)
</p>

<p>
481. Tubingen, Univ. 2. (Greg. 294.)
</p>

<p>
482. Bandur. <hi rend='italic'>ev.</hi> Formerly Montfaucon's. (Greg. 295.)
</p>

<p>
483. Cambridge, Mass. U.S.A., Harvard Univ. 1<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>h</hi>. (Dr. 69) [ix], 12-¼ ×
8-5/8, ff. 6 (19), 2 cols. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Hoskier, MS. 604, App. ii. (Greg. 296.)
</p>

<p>
484. Camb. Mass. U.S.A., Harv. Univ. 2<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>h</hi> [xii], 10-¾ × 8, ff. 230
(23), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> (ff. 171-230), accompanied by an Apost. Hoskier.
(Greg. 297.)
</p>

<p>
485. Camb. Mass. U.S.A., Harv. Univ. 3<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>h</hi> (A. R. G. 1. 3) [xiii],
12-½ × 9-½, ff. 202 (25), 2 cols., twelve leaves or parts of leaves later, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> Hoskier. (Greg. 298.)
</p>

<p>
486. Madison, New Caesarea, Theol. Seminary, Drew MS. 2. (Greg. 301.)
</p>

<p>
487. Sewickley, Pennsylvania, Mr. R. A. Benton. (Greg. 302<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
488. Cambridge, Clare College [xiv], 8-¼ × 6, ff. 163 (21), <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at end.
Brought from Constantinople, and presented by Mr. J. Rendel Harris,
Fellow of the College.
</p>

<p>
489. Sewickley, Pennsylvania, Mr. R. A. Benton. (Greg. 302<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
490. Sewanee, Tennessee, Mr. A. A. Benton. (Greg. 302<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>c</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
491. Princetown, New Caesarea, Theol. Seminary. (Greg. 303.)
</p>

<p>
492. Woolwich (?), Mr. Ch. C. G. Bate. (Greg. 304.)
</p>

<p>
493. Sinaiticus (Λ. 1, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> under Evan. Λ). (Greg. 312.)
</p>

<p>
494. Lond. Highgate, Burdett-Coutts II. 5. (Greg. 313.)
</p>

<p>
495. Lond. Highgate, B.-C. II. 14. (Greg. 314.)
</p>

<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>

<p>
[+]496. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 14,637 [vii], 11-3/8 × 7-1/8, ff. 23, 2 cols.,
<hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, fragments. Palimpsest [x] in Syriac. (Greg. 316.)
</p>

<p>
[+]497. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 14,638 [viii, Greg. ix], 6-½ × 4-7/8,
ff.(26 - 8 = ) 18 (20). Fragments. Palimpsest under Syriac. (Greg. 317.)
</p>

<p>
498. (Apost. 288.) Jerus. Patr. Libr. 105 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1762, May 11],
12-¾ × 9, ff. 228, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi> Written by Athanasius, ἱερεὺς Σαρασίτος.
(Kerameus.)
</p>

<p>
[+]499. London, Brit. Mus. Burney 408 [x], 8 × 6-½, ff. 163 (22), 2 cols.
Palimpsest, hardly legible, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, latter part, as Greg. has discovered, in
early minuscules. Bought in 1872. (Greg. 338.)
</p>

<p>
500. Wisbech, Peckover 70. (Greg. 345.)
</p>

<p>
501. Vindob. Caes. Gr. Theol. 160. (Greg. 347.)
</p>

<p>
502. Vindob. Archduke Rainer (1). (Greg. 348.)
</p>

<p>
503. Vindob. Archd. Rainer (2). (Greg. 349.)
</p>

<p>
504. Montpelier, School of Medicine H. 405. (Greg. 350.)
</p>

<p>
505. Late Henri Bordier. (Greg. 351.)
</p>

<p>
506. Paris, late Emman. Miller 4. (Greg. 352.)
</p>

<p>
[+]507. Paris, late Emman. Miller 5. (Greg. 353.)
</p>

<p>
[+]508. Paris, late Emman. Miller 6. (Greg. 354.)
</p>

<p>
[+]509. Paris, late Emman. Miller 7. (Greg. 355.)
</p>

<p>
510. Florence, Laurent. Gaddianus 124.
</p>

<p>
511. Flor. Riccardi 69, ff. 111.
</p>

<p>
[+]512. Paris, late Emman. Miller 8. (Greg. 356.)
</p>

<p>
[+]513. Paris, late Emman. Miller 9. (Greg. 357.)
</p>

<p>
[+]514. Paris, late Emman. Miller 10. (Greg. 358.)
</p>

<p>
[+]515. Paris, late Emman. Miller 11. (Greg. 359.)
</p>

<p>
[+]516. Paris, late Emman. Miller 12. (Greg. 360.)
</p>

<p>
[+]517. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 1081. (Greg. 373.)
</p>

<p>
518. (Apost. 259.) Athens, Nat. Theol. 25 (163) [xii], 12-¾ × 9-7/8, ff. 327,
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at beg. Beautiful and decorated, <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi> (Greg. 383.)
</p>

<p>
519. Ath. Nat. Theol. 26 (164) [xii], 13-¾ × 10-¼, ff. 291, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>
(Greg. 384.)
</p>

<p>
520. Ath. Nat. Theol. 27 (165) [xiv], 11-¾ × 9, ff. 162, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi> (Greg. 385.)
</p>

<p>
521. Ath. Nat. Theol. 28 (166) [xiv], 12-7/8 × 8-5/8, ff. 236, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at beg.
<hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi> (Greg. 386.)
</p>

<p>
522. Ath. Nat. Theol. 29 (167) [xiv], 12-1/8 × 9, ff. 243, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>
(Greg. 387.)
</p>

<p>
523. Ath. Nat. Theol. 30 (168) [xv], 12-½ × 8-¼, ff. 217, presented to
the Church of Christ τοῦ Μανιτρί in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1527. (Greg. 388.)
</p>

<p>
524. Ath. Nat. Theol. 31 (169) [xiv], 12-½ × 9, ff. 212, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>
(Greg. 389.)
</p>

<p>
525. Messina, Univ. 175.
</p>

<p>
526. Pistoia, Fabronianus.
</p>

<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>

<p>
527. Rom. Angelicus D. ii. 27.
</p>

<p>
528. Athens, Nat. Theol. 32 (170) [xiv], 12-1/8 × 8-5/8, ff. 144. (Greg. 390.)
</p>

<p>
529. Ath. Nat. Theol. 33 (171) [xvi], 12-½ × 8-5/8, ff. 355. (Greg. 391.)
</p>

<p>
530. Ath. Nat. Theol. 34 (172) [xiv], 12-1/8 × 9-7/8, ff. 212, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at beg.
and end, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi> (Greg. 392.)
</p>

<p>
531. Ath. Nat. Theol. 35 (173) [xiv], 11-¾ × 9, ff. 248, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at beg
and end, <hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi>, written by one Michael. (Greg. 393.)
</p>

<p>
532. Ath. Nat. Theol. 36 (174) [xiv], 11-¾ × 9-½, ff. 305, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at end,
<hi rend='italic'>vers.</hi> Very much ornamented; very beautiful and valuable. (Greg. 394.)
</p>

<p>
533. Rom. Barb. iv. 28.
</p>

<p>
534. Ath. Nat. Theol. 37 (175) [xiv], 11-¾ × 8-5/8, ff. 180-last 18 <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
(Greg. 395.)
</p>

<p>
535. Ath. Nat. 38 (176) [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1328], 11-¾ × 8-¼, ff. 222. Written by
Hilarion of Beroea. (Greg. 396.)
</p>

<p>
536. Ath. Nat. 39 ? (Greg. 397.)
</p>

<p>
537. Ath. Nat. 40 (177) [xiv], 11 × 8-¼, ff. 79, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at beg. Matt.
and Luke. Palimpsest. Under-writing [viii]. Written by Joseph.
(Greg. 398<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
[+]538. Ath. Nat. 41 (178) [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1311], 11 × 8-¼, ff. 266. Written by
Leon. (Greg. 399<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>, <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
539. Rom. Vat. Gr. 350.
</p>

<p>
540. Athos, Dionysius 23. (Greg. 400.)
</p>

<p>
541. Athens, Nat. Theol. 42 (179) [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1311], 11 × 8-¼, ff. 266, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>
Written by Leon. (Greg. 401.)
</p>

<p>
542. Ath. Nat. Theol. 43 (180) [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1089], 10-5/8 × 8-¼, ff. 204, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>
Written by Andreas. (Greg. 402.)
</p>

<p>
543. Ath. Nat. Theol. 44 (181) [xiv], 9-7/8 × 7-½, ff. 257, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi> (Greg. 403.)
</p>

<p>
544. Ath. Nat. Theol. 45 (182) [xii], 11 × 9, ff. 156, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at beg.
and end, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi> (Greg. 404.)
</p>

<p>
545. Rom. Vallicell. C. 7.
</p>

<p>
546. Ath. Nat. Theol. 46 (183) [xiv], 10-5/8 × 8-5/8, ff. 151. (Greg. 405.)
</p>

<p>
547. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1217.
</p>

<p>
548. (Apost. 229.) Rom. Vat. Gr. 1228.
</p>

<p>
549. Ath. Nat. Theol. 47 (184) [xv], 11-¾ × 8-5/8, ff. 242. (Greg. 406.)
</p>

<p>
550. Ath. Nat. Theol. 48 (185) [xii], 11 × 8-¼, ff. 260, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi> (Greg. 407.)
</p>

<p>
551. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1625.
</p>

<p>
552. Ath. Nat. Theol. 49 (186) [xii], 11-3/8 × 9, ff. 167, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi> (Greg. 408.)
</p>

<p>
553. Ath. Nat. Theol. 50 (187) [xii], 11-3/8 × 8-¼, ff. 270, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at beg.,
<hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi> Written by George. (Greg. 409.)
</p>

<p>
554. (Apost. 221.) Rom. Vat. Gr. 1973.
</p>

<p>
555. (Apost. 222.) Rom. Vat. Gr. 1978.
</p>

<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>

<p>
556. Ath. Nat. Theol. 51 (188) [xi], 8-¼ × 5-7/8, ff. 302, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi> (Greg. 410.)
</p>

<p>
557. (Apost. 224.) Rom. Vat. Gr. 2051.
</p>

<p>
558. (Apost. 225.) Rom. Vat. Gr. 2052.
</p>

<p>
559. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2061.
</p>

<p>
560. Ath. Nat. Theol. 52 (189) [xv], 8-¼ × 5-7/8, ff. 156, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi> (Greg. 411.)
</p>

<p>
561. Ath. Nat. Theol. 53 (190) [xii], 9-7/8 × 8-¼, ff. 255, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi> (Greg. 412.)
</p>

<p>
562. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2138.
</p>

<p>
563. Ath. Nat. Theol. 54 (191) [xii], 11-3/8 × 9, ff. 158, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at beg.
and end, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi> (Greg. 413.)
</p>

<p>
564. Ath. Nat. Theol. 55 (192) [xv], 6-¾ × 5-1/8, ff. 239. Palimpsest, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
at beg. and end. (Greg. 414.)
</p>

<p>
[+]565. Ath. Nat. Theol. 56 (193) [xv], 9 × 6-¾, ff. 215, much <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> The
two last leaves are palimpsest [ix], <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi> (Greg. 415.)
</p>

<p>
566. Ath. Nat. Theol. 57 (194) [xv], 11 × 8-¼, ff. 395, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi> Note of
date, about <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1450, at end. (Greg. 416.)
</p>

<p>
567. Ath. Nat. Theol. 58 (195) [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1536], 10-5/8 × 8-¼, ff. 396, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
Beautifully written by John. (Greg. 417.)
</p>

<p>
568. Ath. Nat. Theol. 59 (196) [xv], 10-¼ × 8-¼, ff. 206, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at
end. (Greg. 418.)
</p>

<p>
569. Ath. Nat. Theol. 60 (197) [xv], 7-7/8 × 5-7/8, ff. 341, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> (Greg. 419.)
</p>

<p>
570. Ath. Nat. Theol. 61 (198) [xv], 9 × 6-¾, ff. 342, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> (Greg. 420.)
</p>

<p>
571. (Apost. 188.) Ath. Nat. Theol. 62 (199) [xiv], 9-½ × 7-1/8, ff. 292,
<hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi> (Greg. 421.)
</p>

<p>
572. (Apost. 189.) Ath. Nat. Theol. 63 (200) [xv], 11 × 8-¼, ff. 340, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
at beg. and end, and in other places. Michael of Damascus was the
diorthote, or possessor. (Greg. 422.)
</p>

<p>
573. (Apost. 190.) Ath. Nat. Theol. 64 (201) [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1732], 8-¼ × 5-7/8,
ff. 32. Written by Nicephorus. (Greg. 423.)
</p>

<p>
574. Ath. Nat. Theol. 65 (202) [xii], 11-3/8 × 8-5/8, ff. 68. Separate
fragments (four, Greg.), <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi> (Greg. 424.)
</p>

<p>
575. (Apost. 113.) Syracuse, Seminary 4.
</p>

<p>
576. Venice, St. Lazarus 1631.
</p>

<p>
577. Athos, Dionysius 378.
</p>

<p>
578. Edinburgh, Univ. Laing 9.
</p>

<p>
579. Athos, St. Andrew Γ'.
</p>

<p>
580. Athos, St. Andrew Λ'.
</p>

<p>
581. Athos, St. Andrew ϛ᾽.
</p>

<p>
582. Athos, St. Andrew Ζ.
</p>

<p>
583. Athos, Vatopedi 48.
</p>

<p>
584. Athos, Vatopedi 192.
</p>

<p>
585. Athos, Vatopedi 193.
</p>

<p>
586. Athos, Vatopedi 194.
</p>

<p>
587. Athos, Vatopedi 195.
</p>

<p>
588. Athos, Vatopedi 196.
</p>

<p>
589. Athos, Vatopedi 197.
</p>

<p>
590. Athos, Vatopedi 198.
</p>

<p>
591. Athos, Vatopedi 200.
</p>

<p>
592. Athos, Vatopedi 202.
</p>

<p>
593. Athos, Vatopedi 204.
</p>

<p>
594. Athos, Vatopedi 205.
</p>

<p>
595. Athos, Vatopedi 208.
</p>

<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>

<p>
596. Athos, Vatopedi 209.
</p>

<p>
597. Athos, Vatopedi 220.
</p>

<p>
598. Athos, Vatopedi 221.
</p>

<p>
599. Athos, Vatopedi 223.
</p>

<p>
600. Athos, Vatopedi 224.
</p>

<p>
601. Athos, Vatopedi (225).
</p>

<p>
602. Athos, Vatopedi (226).
</p>

<p>
603. Athos, Vatopedi (227).
</p>

<p>
604. Athos, Vatopedi 228.
</p>

<p>
605. Athos, Vatopedi 229.
</p>

<p>
606. Athos, Vatopedi 230.
</p>

<p>
607. Athos, Vatopedi 231.
</p>

<p>
608. Athos, Vatopedi 232.
</p>

<p>
609. Athos, Vatopedi 233.
</p>

<p>
610. Athos, Vatopedi 234.
</p>

<p>
611. Athos, Vatopedi 235.
</p>

<p>
612. Athos, Vatopedi 236.
</p>

<p>
613. Athos, Vatopedi 237.
</p>

<p>
614. Athos, Vatopedi 238.
</p>

<p>
615. Athos, Vatopedi 239.
</p>

<p>
616. Athos, Vatopedi 240.
</p>

<p>
617. Athos, Vatopedi 241.
</p>

<p>
618. Athos, Vatopedi 242.
</p>

<p>
619. Athos, Vatopedi 243.
</p>

<p>
620. Athos, Vatopedi 253.
</p>

<p>
621. Athos, Vatopedi 254.
</p>

<p>
622. Athos, Vatopedi 255.
</p>

<p>
623. Athos, Vatopedi 256.
</p>

<p>
624. Athos, Vatopedi 257.
</p>

<p>
625. Athos, Vatopedi 271.
</p>

<p>
626. Athos, Vatopedi 291.
</p>

<p>
627. Athos, Dionysius 1.
</p>

<p>
628. Athos, Dionysius 2.
</p>

<p>
629. Athos, Dionysius 3.
</p>

<p>
630. Athos, Dionysius 6.
</p>

<p>
631. Athos, Dionysius 11.
</p>

<p>
632. Athos, Dionysius 13.
</p>

<p>
633. Athos, Dionysius 14.
</p>

<p>
634. Athos, Dionysius 15.
</p>

<p>
635. Athos, Dionysius 16.
</p>

<p>
636. Athos, Dionysius 17.
</p>

<p>
637. Athos, Dionysius 18.
</p>

<p>
638. Athos, Dionysius 19.
</p>

<p>
639. Athos, Dionysius 20.
</p>

<p>
640. Athos, Dionysius 21.
</p>

<p>
641. Athos, Dionysius 85.
</p>

<p>
642. Athos, Dionysius 163.
</p>

<p>
643. Athos, Dionysius 302.
</p>

<p>
644. Athos, Dionysius 303.
</p>

<p>
645. Athos, Dionysius 304.
</p>

<p>
646. Athos, Dionysius 305.
</p>

<p>
647. Athos, Dionysius 306.
</p>

<p>
648. Athos, Dionysius 307.
</p>

<p>
649. Athos, Dionysius 308.
</p>

<p>
650. Athos, Dionysius 309.
</p>

<p>
651. Athos, Docheiariou 1.
</p>

<p>
652. Athos, Docheiariou 10.
</p>

<p>
653. Athos, Docheiariou 13.
</p>

<p>
654. Athos, Docheiariou 14.
</p>

<p>
655. Athos, Docheiariou 15.
</p>

<p>
656. Athos, Docheiariou 19.
</p>

<p>
657. Athos, Docheiariou 23.
</p>

<p>
658. Athos, Docheiariou 24.
</p>

<p>
659. Athos, Docheiariou 36.
</p>

<p>
660. Athos, Docheiariou 58.
</p>

<p>
661. Athos, Docheiariou 137.
</p>

<p>
662. Athos, Esphigmenou 19.
</p>

<p>
663. Athos, Esphigmenou 20.
</p>

<p>
664. Athos, Esphigmenou 21.
</p>

<p>
665. Athos, Esphigmenou 22.
</p>

<p>
666. Athos, Esphigmenou 23.
</p>

<p>
667. Athos, Esphigmenou 24.
</p>

<p>
668. Athos, Esphigmenou 27.
</p>

<p>
669. Athos, Esphigmenou 28.
</p>

<p>
670. Athos, Esphigmenou 35.
</p>

<p>
671. Athos, Esphigmenou 60.
</p>

<p>
672. Athos, Iveron 1.
</p>

<p>
673. Athos, Iveron 3.
</p>

<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>

<p>
674. Athos, Iveron 4.
</p>

<p>
675. Athos, Iveron 6.
</p>

<p>
676. Athos, Iveron 20.
</p>

<p>
677. Athos, Iveron 23.
</p>

<p>
678. Athos, Iveron 35.
</p>

<p>
679. Athos, Iveron 36.
</p>

<p>
680. (Apost. 229.) Athos, Iveron 39.
</p>

<p>
681. Athos, Iveron 635.
</p>

<p>
682. Athos, Iveron 637.
</p>

<p>
683. Athos, Iveron 638.
</p>

<p>
684. Athos, Iveron 639.
</p>

<p>
685. Athos, Iveron 640.
</p>

<p>
686. Athos, Iveron 825.
</p>

<p>
687. Athos, Iveron 826.
</p>

<p>
688. Athos, Caracalla 3.
</p>

<p>
689. Athos, Caracalla 11.
</p>

<p>
690. Athos, Caracalla 15.
</p>

<p>
691. Athos, Caracalla 16.
</p>

<p>
692. Athos, Caracalla 17.
</p>

<p>
693. Athos, Constamonitou 6.
</p>

<p>
694. Athos, Constamonitou 98.
</p>

<p>
695. Athos, Constamonitou 100 [xii], 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> Omitted
by Gregory, who has erroneously inserted the Evan. 99 instead (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi>
Spyridon P. Lampros).
</p>

<p>
696. Athos, Coutloumoussi 60.
</p>

<p>
697. Athos, Coutloumoussi 61.
</p>

<p>
698. Athos, Coutloumoussi 62.
</p>

<p>
699. Athos, Coutloumoussi 63.
</p>

<p>
700. Athos, Coutloumoussi 64.
</p>

<p>
701. Athos, Coutloumoussi 65.
</p>

<p>
702. Athos, Coutloumoussi 66.
</p>

<p>
703. Athos, Coutloumoussi 86.
</p>

<p>
[+]704. Athos, Coutloumoussi 90.
</p>

<p>
705. Athos, Coutloumoussi 279.
</p>

<p>
706. Athos, Coutloumoussi 280.
</p>

<p>
707. (Apost. 233.) Athos, Coutloumoussi 282.
</p>

<p>
708. Athos, Coutloumoussi 292.
</p>

<p>
709. (Apost. 234.) Athos, Coutloumoussi 356.
</p>

<p>
710. Athos, Xenophon 1.
</p>

<p>
711. Athos, Xenophon 58.
</p>

<p>
712. Athos, Xenophon 59.
</p>

<p>
713. Athos, Xenophon 68. (Greg. 71.)
</p>

<p>
714. Athos, Xeropotamou 110.
</p>

<p>
715. Athos, Xeropotamou 112.
</p>

<p>
716. Athos, Xeropotamou 118.
</p>

<p>
717. Athos, Xeropotamou 122.
</p>

<p>
718. Athos, Xeropotamou 125.
</p>

<p>
719. Athos, Xeropotamou 126.
</p>

<p>
720. Athos, Xeropotamou 234.
</p>

<p>
721. Athos, Xeropotamou 247.
</p>

<p>
722. Athos, Panteleemon L.
</p>

<p>
723. Athos, Panteleemon IV. vi. 4.
</p>

<p>
724. Athos, Panteleemon IX. v. 3.
</p>

<p>
725. Athos, Panteleemon XXVII. vi. 2.
</p>

<p>
726. Athos, Panteleemon XXVII. vi. 3.
</p>

<p>
727. Athos, Panteleemon XXVIII. i. 1.
</p>

<p>
728. Athos, Paul 1.
</p>

<p>
729. Athos, Protaton 11.
</p>

<p>
730. Athos, Protaton 14.
</p>

<p>
731. Athos, Protaton 15.
</p>

<p>
732. Athos, Protaton 44.
</p>

<p>
733. Athos, Protaton 56.
</p>

<p>
734. Athos, Simopetra 17.
</p>

<p>
735. Athos, Simopetra 19.
</p>

<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>

<p>
736. Athos, Simopetra 20.
</p>

<p>
737. Athos, Simopetra 21.
</p>

<p>
738. Athos, Simopetra 24.
</p>

<p>
739. Athos, Simopetra 27.
</p>

<p>
740. Athos, Simopetra 28.
</p>

<p>
741. (Apost. 237.) Athos, Simopetra 30.
</p>

<p>
742. Athos, Simopetra 33.
</p>

<p>
743. (Apost. 238.) Athos, Simopetra 70.
</p>

<p>
744. Athos, Stauroniketa 1.
</p>

<p>
745. Athos, Stauroniketa 27.
</p>

<p>
746. Athos, Stauroniketa 42.
</p>

<p>
747. Athos, Stauroniketa 102.
</p>

<p>
748. Athos, Philotheou 1.
</p>

<p>
749. Athos, Philotheou 2.
</p>

<p>
750. Athos, Philotheou 3.
</p>

<p>
751. (Apost. 239.) Athos, Philotheou 6.
</p>

<p>
752. Athos, Philotheou 18.
</p>

<p>
753. Athos, Philotheou 25.
</p>

<p>
754. Athos, Philotheou 61.
</p>

<p>
755. (Apost. 240.) Athos, Philotheou 213.
</p>

<p>
756. Athos, Chiliandari 6.
</p>

<p>
757. Athos, Chiliandari 15.
</p>

<p>
758. Beratinus, in a Church.
</p>

<p>
759. Athens, Nat. Sakkelion 4. (Greg. 425.)
</p>

<p>
760. Cairo, Patr. Alex. 927.
</p>

<p>
761. Cairo, Patr. Alex. 929.
</p>

<p>
762. Cairo, Patr. Alex. 943.
</p>

<p>
763. Cairo, Patr. Alex. 944.
</p>

<p>
764. Cairo, Patr. Alex. 945.
</p>

<p>
765. Cairo, Patr. Alex. 946.
</p>

<p>
766. Cairo, Patr. Alex. 948.
</p>

<p>
767. Cairo, Patr. Alex. 950.
</p>

<p>
768. Cairo, Patr. Alex. 951.
</p>

<p>
769. Cairo, Patr. Alex. 953.
</p>

<p>
770. Chalcis, Mon. Trinity 1.
</p>

<p>
771. Chalcis, Mon. Trinity 2.
</p>

<p>
772. Chalcis, Mon. Trinity 3.
</p>

<p>
773. Chalcis, Mon. Trinity 4.
</p>

<p>
774. Chalcis, Mon. Trinity 5.
</p>

<p>
775. Chalcis, Mon. Trinity 6.
</p>

<p>
776. Chalcis, Mon. Trinity 7.
</p>

<p>
777. Chalcis, Mon. Trinity 8.
</p>

<p>
778. Chalcis, Mon. Trinity 9.
</p>

<p>
779. Chalcis, Mon. Trinity 10.
</p>

<p>
780. Chalcis, School 1.
</p>

<p>
781. Chalcis, School 2.
</p>

<p>
782. Chalcis, School 3.
</p>

<p>
783. Chalcis, School 4.
</p>

<p>
784. Chalcis, School 5.
</p>

<p>
785. Chalcis, School 6.
</p>

<p>
786. Chalcis, School 7.
</p>

<p>
787. Chalcis, School 12.
</p>

<p>
788. Chalcis, School 74 (75 ?).
</p>

<p>
789. Chalcis, School 84.
</p>

<p>
790. Constantinople, St. George's Church.
</p>

<p>
791. Constantinople, St. George's.
</p>

<p>
792. Constantinople, ἁγίου τάφου.
</p>

<p>
793. Constantinople, ἁγίου τάφου.
</p>

<p>
794. Constantinople, ἁγίου τάφου 426.
</p>

<p>
795. Constantinople, ἁγίου τάφου 432.
</p>

<p>
796. Constantinople, τ. ἑλληνικοῦ φιλολογικοῦ συλλόγου.
</p>

<p>
797. (Apost. 243.) Jerusalem, Coll. St. Cross 6.
</p>

<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>

<p>
798. Lesbos, τ. Λείμωνος μονῆς 1 [ix or x], 11-¾ × 9-½, ff. 79 (20), 2 cols.,
περικοπαί from the Evangelists John, Matt., Luke, Mark, κατὰ παννύχια,
<hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> (Kerameus.)
</p>

<p>
799. Lesbos, τ. Λείμωνος μονῆς 37 [x-xi], 11-¾ × 9-¼, ff. 288, 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>
(Kerameus.)
</p>

<p>
800. Lesbos, τ. Λείμ. μον. 38 [xi], 11-¾ × 9-½, ff. 208, 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>
(Kerameus.)
</p>

<p>
801. Lesbos, τ. Λείμ. μον. 40 [xiv], 12-½ × 9, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> (Kerameus.)
</p>

<p>
802. Lesbos, τ. Λείμ. μον. 41 [xii-xiii], 12-½ × 9, ff. 221, 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi>
(Kerameus.)
</p>

<p>
803. Lesbos, τ. Λείμ. μον. 66 [xii-xiii], 9-5/8 × 6-¾, ff. 428, the last <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>
written on in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1558. <hi rend='italic'>Mus.</hi> (Kerameus.)
</p>

<p>
804. (Apost. 191.) Athens, Nat. 3 (685) [xv], 6-3/8 × 4-¾, ff. 187, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at
beg. Apostoloeuaggelia for the Feasts of the whole year after Liturgical
matter. (Greg. 426.)
</p>

<p>
805. Patmos 68.
</p>

<p>
806. Patmos 69.
</p>

<p>
807. Patmos 70.
</p>

<p>
808. Patmos 71.
</p>

<p>
809. Patmos 72.
</p>

<p>
810. Patmos 73.
</p>

<p>
811. Patmos 74.
</p>

<p>
812. Patmos 75.
</p>

<p>
813. Patmos 77.
</p>

<p>
814. Patmos 78.
</p>

<p>
815. Patmos 79.
</p>

<p>
816. Patmos 85.
</p>

<p>
817. Patmos 86.
</p>

<p>
818. Patmos 87.
</p>

<p>
819. Patmos 88.
</p>

<p>
820. Patmos 89.
</p>

<p>
821. Patmos 91.
</p>

<p>
822. Patmos 93.
</p>

<p>
823. Patmos 99.
</p>

<p>
824. Patmos 101.
</p>

<p>
825. Patmos 330.
</p>

<p>
826. Patmos 331.
</p>

<p>
827. Patmos 332.
</p>

<p>
828. (Apost. 192.) Athens, Nat. f? (Greg. 427.)
</p>

<p>
829. Athens, Nat. 10? (Greg. 428.)
</p>

<p>
830. Thessalonica, Ἑλλην. γυμνασίου Α'.
</p>

<p>
831. Thess. Ἑλλην. γυμνασίου Β'.
</p>

<p>
832. Thess. Ἑλλην. γυμνασίου Γ'.
</p>

<p>
833. Thess. Ἑλλην. γυμνασίου Δ'.
</p>

<p>
834. Thess. Ἑλλην. γυμνασίου Ε'.
</p>

<p>
835. Thess. Ἑλλην. γυμνασίου Ζ'.
</p>

<p>
836. Thess. Ἑλλην. γυμνασίου Θ'.
</p>

<p>
837. Thess. Ἑλλην. γυμνασίου ΙΔ'.
</p>

<p>
838. Thess. Μ. Σπύριος.
</p>

<p>
839. Sinai 205.
</p>

<p>
840. Sinai 206.
</p>

<p>
841. Sinai 207.
</p>

<p>
842. Sinai 208.
</p>

<p>
843. Sinai 209.
</p>

<p>
[+]844. Sinai 210.
</p>

<p>
[+]845. Sinai 211.
</p>

<p>
846. Sinai 212.
</p>

<p>
[+]847. Sinai 213.
</p>

<p>
[+]848. Sinai 214.
</p>

<p>
[+]849. Sinai 215.
</p>

<p>
850. Sinai 216.
</p>

<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>

<p>
851. Sinai 217.
</p>

<p>
852. Sinai 218.
</p>

<p>
853. Sinai 219.
</p>

<p>
854. Sinai 220.
</p>

<p>
855. Sinai 221.
</p>

<p>
856. Sinai 222.
</p>

<p>
857. Sinai 223.
</p>

<p>
858. Sinai 224.
</p>

<p>
859. Sinai 225.
</p>

<p>
860. Sinai 226.
</p>

<p>
861. Sinai 227.
</p>

<p>
862. Sinai 228.
</p>

<p>
863. Sinai 229.
</p>

<p>
864. Sinai 230.
</p>

<p>
865. Sinai 231.
</p>

<p>
866. Sinai 232.
</p>

<p>
867. Sinai 233.
</p>

<p>
868. Sinai 234.
</p>

<p>
869. Sinai 235.
</p>

<p>
870. Sinai 236.
</p>

<p>
871. Sinai 237.
</p>

<p>
872. Sinai 238.
</p>

<p>
873. Sinai 239.
</p>

<p>
874. Sinai 240.
</p>

<p>
875. Sinai 241.
</p>

<p>
876. Sinai 242.
</p>

<p>
877. Sinai 243.
</p>

<p>
878. Sinai 244.
</p>

<p>
879. Sinai 245.
</p>

<p>
880. Sinai 246.
</p>

<p>
881. Sinai 247.
</p>

<p>
882. Sinai 248.
</p>

<p>
883. Sinai 249.
</p>

<p>
884. Sinai 250.
</p>

<p>
885. Sinai 251.
</p>

<p>
886. Sinai 252.
</p>

<p>
887. Sinai 253.
</p>

<p>
888. Sinai 254.
</p>

<p>
889. Sinai 255.
</p>

<p>
890. Sinai 256.
</p>

<p>
891. Sinai 257.
</p>

<p>
892. Sinai 258.
</p>

<p>
893. Sinai 271.
</p>

<p>
894. (Apost. 260.) Sinai 272.
</p>

<p>
895. (Apost. 261.) Sinai 273.
</p>

<p>
896. Sinai 550.
</p>

<p>
897. Sinai 659.
</p>

<p>
898. Sinai 720.
</p>

<p>
899. Sinai 738.
</p>

<p>
900. (Apost. 247.) Sinai 748.
</p>

<p>
901. Sinai 754.
</p>

<p>
902. Sinai 756.
</p>

<p>
903. Sinai 775.
</p>

<p>
904. Sinai 796.
</p>

<p>
905. Sinai 797.
</p>

<p>
906. Sinai 800.
</p>

<p>
907. Sinai 929.
</p>

<p>
908. (Apost. 248.) Sinai 943.
</p>

<p>
909. Sinai 957.
</p>

<p>
910. Sinai 960.
</p>

<p>
911. (Apost. 249.) Sinai 961.
</p>

<p>
912. Sinai 962.
</p>

<p>
913. Sinai 965.
</p>

<p>
914. Sinai 968.
</p>

<p>
915. (Apost. 258.) Sinai 972.
</p>

<p>
916. (Apost. 251.) Sinai 973.
</p>

<p>
917. (Apost. 252.) Sinai 977.
</p>

<p>
918. Sinai 981.
</p>

<p>
919. Sinai 982.
</p>

<p>
920. Sinai 986.
</p>

<p>
921. Sinai 1042.
</p>

<p>
922. Oxf. Bodl. Clarke 9. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Act. 58.)
</p>

<p>
923. Jerusalem, Patriarchal Library 33 [end of x or beg. of xi],
10-½ × 8-¼, ff. 335 (221 - 252 = 32) [xiii], <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi> (Papadopoulos
Kerameus.)
</p>

<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>

<p>
924. (Apost. 253.) Rom. Vat. Reg. 54.
</p>

<p>
925. Venice, St. Mark 188.
</p>

<p>
926. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 10,068 [?], 9 × 7, ff. 124, 2 cols.,
palimpsest, illegible and will not repay investigation.
</p>

<p>
927. Jerus. Patr. Libr. 161 [xvii], 11-1/8 × 8-1/8, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, collections of bits
of Evst. (Kerameus.)
</p>

<p>
928. Jerus. Patr. Libr. 526 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1502], 12-3/8 x 8-3/8, ff. 108, 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>,
with many directions. (Kerameus.)
</p>

<p>
929. New York, Seminary of Theol. Univ.
</p>

<p>
930. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 19,459 [xii, Greg. xiii], 11-½ x 9-¼, ff. 230
(24-8), 2 cols. (ff. 22 inserted later), <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> beg. and end, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
931. (Apost. 126.) Venice, St. Mark ii. 130.
</p>

<p>
932. Jerus. Patr. Libr. 530, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, Turkish in Greek letters.
(Kerameus.)
</p>

<p>
933. Petersburg, Caes. Muralt. 64 (ix. 1).
</p>

<p>
934. St. Saba 55 [xii], 4to. Coxe.
</p>

<p>
935. Quaritch 8 [about <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1200], ff. 346 (26), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, letters
in red, green, blue, yellow, bound in red morocco case. (Catalogue,
Dec. 1893.)
</p>

<p>
936. Lesb. τ. Λείμ. μον. 100. Ἀποστολοευαγγέλια in the midst of the
four Liturgies and other matter. (Kerameus.)
</p>

<p>
937. Lesb. τ. Λείμ. μον. 146 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1562-66], 7-7/8 × 5-¾. Begins with
St. Matt. (Kerameus.)
</p>

<p>
938. Lesb. ἐν μονῇ Ἁγίου Ἰωάννου τοῦ Θεολόγου 11 [xii], 9-¼ × 7, ff. 157
(2, 5, and 6 being chart., one is of the eleventh century). (Kerameus.)
</p>

<p>
939. Lesb. Ἁγ. Ἰωάνν. 12, 8-7/8 × 7-1/8, ff. 110. (Kerameus.)
</p>

<p>
940. Lesb. Benjamin Library at Potamos ΛΛ [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1565], 12-1/8 × 8-¼,
ff. 378. (Kerameus.)
</p>

<p>
941. Athos, Constamonitou 98 [xiv], 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi> (Sp.
P. Lampros.)
</p>

<p>
942. Athos, Constam. 100.
</p>

<p>
[+]943. Athens, Nat. Libr. 60 [ix], 13-3/8 × 5-7/8 ?, ff. 87, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>
</p>

<p>
944. Ath. Nat. Libr. 78 [x], 13-¾ × 10-¼, ff. 143. Palimpsest under
fifteenth century writing. <hi rend='italic'>Mus.</hi>
</p>

<p>
945. Ath. Nat. Libr. 83 [xv], 11 × 7-7/8, ff. 324, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at end.
</p>

<p>
946. Ath. Nat. Libr. 97 [xii], 12-½ × 8-5/8, ff. 136, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at beg. and end,
mus.
</p>

<p>
947. (Apost. 227.) Ath. Nat. Libr. 126 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1504], 8-¼ × 5-7/8, ff. 276,
written by Euthymius.
</p>

<p>
948. Ath. Nat. Libr. 143 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1522], 7-½ × 5-7/8, ff. 242. A few
leaves wanting at beginning.
</p>

<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>

<p>
949. Ath. Nat. Libr. 147 [xii beg.], 9-7/8 × 6-¾, ff. 255&mdash;first eight
injured. <hi rend='italic'>Mus.</hi>
</p>

<p>
950. Ath. Nat. Libr. 148 [xv end], 7-½ × 5-7/8, ff. 104, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at beg.
and end.
</p>

<p>
The following thirteen MSS. in the National Library at Athens
contain portions of Apostoloeuaggelia:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
951. (Apost. 277.) 668, 7-½ × 5-½, ff. 282.
</p>

<p>
952. (Apost. 278.) 685, 5-7/8 × 4-¾, ff. 187.
</p>

<p>
953. (Apost. 279.) 700, 5-7/8 × 4, ff. 326.
</p>

<p>
954. (Apost. 280.) 707, 6-¼ × 4-¾, ff. 131.
</p>

<p>
955. (Apost. 281.) 750, 8-5/8 × 6-¼, ff. 117.
</p>

<p>
956. (Apost. 282.) 757, 8-¼ × 5-½, ff. 120.
</p>

<p>
957. (Apost. 283.) 759, 8-¼ × 6-¼, ff. 129.
</p>

<p>
958. (Apost. 284.) 760, 7-7/8 × 5-½, ff. 262.
</p>

<p>
959. (Apost. 285.) 766, 8-¼ × 5-7/8, ff. 134.
</p>

<p>
960. (Apost. 286.) 769, 5-½ × 4, ff. 175.
</p>

<p>
961. (Apost. 287.) 784, 5-7/8 × 4-3/8, ff. 36.
</p>

<p>
962. (Apost. 288.) 786, 5-1/8 × 4, ff. 48.
</p>

<p>
963. (Apost. 289.) 795, 7-½ × 5-½, ff. 495<note place='foot'>[+]Evan. T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi> and T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> and Λ (1) should also properly be classed as Lectionaries.
Apost. 15, and perhaps Apost. 24, also contains Lessons from the Gospels. The
two copies of the Gospels, Lowes formerly Askew, membr. 4to, mentioned by
Scholz (N. T., vol. i. p. cxix), and stated by Marsh on Michaelis, vol. ii. p. 662,
to have been bought at Askew's sale by Mr. Lowes, the bookseller, are shown by
the sale catalogue to have Evangelistaria. They have not yet been traced. (Ed. 3.)</note>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XIV. Lectionaries Containing The Apostolos Or Praxapostolos.</head>

<p>
*[+]1. (Evst. 6.)
</p>

<p>
2. Lond. Brit. Mus. Cotton. Vesp. B. xviii [xi], 11 × 8-¼, ff. 230 (16),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> initio et fine (Casley)<note place='foot'>In 1721. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Monk's <q>Life of Bentley,</q> vol. ii. p. 149. This is Bentley's O,
John Walker's collation of which is preserved at Trin. Coll. (B. xvii. 34). Ellis,
Bentleii Critica Sacra, Introd. pp. xxix, xxx.</note>.  In a fine bold hand.
The Museum Catalogue is wrong in stating that it contains Lessons from
the Gospels. They exactly correspond with those in our list, five of the
Saints' Day Lessons being from the Catholic Epistles.
</p>

<p>
3. Readings sent to Mill (N. T., Proleg. § 1470) by John Batteley, D.D.,
as taken from a codex, now missing, in Trinity Hall, Cambridge. The
extracts were from 1 Peter and John. Griesbach's Paul. 3 is Bodl. 5
(Evst. 19), cited by Mill only at Hebr. x. 22, 23.
</p>

<p>
4. (Evst. 112.)
</p>

<p>
*5. Gottingen, Univ. MS. Theol. 54 [xv], 10-¾ × 7-7/8, ff. 50 (28), 2 cols.,
formerly of the monastery Constamonitou on Athos, afterwards De Missy's
(Matthaei's v). (Paul. 5 of Griesbach = Evst. 30.)
</p>

<p>
6. (Evan. 117, ff. 183-202.)
</p>

<p>
7. (Evst. 37.)
</p>

<p>
8. (Evst. 44.)
</p>

<p>
9. (Evst. 84.)
</p>

<p>
10. (Evst. 85.)
</p>

<p>
11. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 104 [xii, Greg. xiii], 9-¾ × 7-½, ff. 139 (24),
well written in some monastery of Palestine: with marginal notes
in Arabic.
</p>

<p>
*12. (Evst, 60.)
</p>

<p>
*13. Moscow, Synod. 4 (Mt. b) [x], fol., ff. 313, 2 cols., important:
once belonged to the Iveron monastery; renovated by Joakim, a monk,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1525. Cited by Tregelles as Frag. Mosq.
</p>

<p>
*14. Mosc. Synod. 291 (Mt. e) [xii], 4to, ff. 276, well written, from
the monastery Esphigmenou on Athos.
</p>

<p>
*15. Mosc. Typogr. Syn. 31 (Mt. tz) [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1116], fol., ff. 200, a few
Lections from 1 John at the end of Lections from Old Testament.
</p>

<p>
*16. (Evst. 52.)
</p>

<p>
*17. (Evst. 53.)
</p>

<p>
*18. (Evst. 54.)
</p>

<p>
*19. (Evst. 55.)
</p>

<p>
*20. (Evst. 56.)
</p>

<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>

<p>
Apost. 21-48 comprise Scholz's additions to the list, of which he
describes none as collated entire or in the greater part. He seems, however,
to have collated Cod. 12 entire.
</p>

<p>
21. (Evst. 83.)
</p>

<p>
22. Par. Nat. Gr. 304 [xiii, Greg. xiv], 13-5/8 × 10-¾, ff. 302 (22), 2 cols.,
brought from Constantinople: <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> in fine.
</p>

<p>
23. Par. Nat. Gr. 306 [xii], 13 × 10-1/8, ff. 187 (28), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> initio
et fine.
</p>

<p>
24. Par. Nat. Gr. 308 [xiii], ff. 201, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, contains six Lections from
1 John and 1 Pet., more from the Old Testament.
</p>

<p>
25. Par. Nat. Gr. 319 [xi, Greg. xii], 12-¼ x 8-½, ff. 274 (22), ill
written, with a Latin version over some portions of the text. Once
Colbert's.
</p>

<p>
26. Par. Nat. Gr. 320 [xii], 9-1/8 × 7-¾, ff. 208 (21), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
</p>

<p>
27. Par. Nat. Gr. 321, once Colbert's [xiii, Greg. xiv], 11-3/8 × 8,
ff. 237 (23), <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, and illegible in parts.
</p>

<p>
28. (Evst. 26.)
</p>

<p>
29. (Evst. 94.)
</p>

<p>
30. Par. Nat. Gr. 373 [xiii, Greg. xiv], 8-3/8 x 6-¾, ff. 118 (21), <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
initio et fine: with some cotton-paper leaves at the end.
</p>

<p>
31. (Evst. 82.)
</p>

<p>
32. (Evan. 324, Evst. 97.)
</p>

<p>
33. Par. Nat. Gr. 382 [xiii, Greg. x], 9-½ × 7-1/8, 271 (22), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi> Once Colbert's.
</p>

<p>
34. Par. Nat. Gr. 383, once Colbert's [xv, Greg. xvi], 8-3/8 × 5-¼,
ff. 206 (31), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> In readings it is much with Apost. 12.
</p>

<p>
35. (Evst. 92.)
</p>

<p>
36. (Evst. 93.)
</p>

<p>
37. Ath. Nat. Libr. 103 [xv], 9 × 6-¼, ff. 199.
</p>

<p>
38. Rom. Vat. Gr. 1528 [xv], 8-¼ × 6, ff. 235 (26), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, written by
the monk Eucholius.
</p>

<p>
39. (Evst. 133.)
</p>

<p>
40. Rom. Barberini 18 [x], 4to, a palimpsest (probably uncial, though
not so stated by Scholz), correctly written, but mostly become illegible.
The later writing [xiv] contains Lessons from the Old Testament, with
a few from the Catholic Epistles at the end.
</p>

<p>
41. Rom. Barb., unnumbered [xi], 4to, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> ff. 1-114.
</p>

<p>
42. Rom. Vallicell. C. 46 [xvi], 8-½ × 6-¼, ff. 115 (24), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, with other
matter.
</p>

<p>
[+]43. (Evan. 561.) The palimpsest [viii or ix], written over the Gospels
and table of Lessons, and containing Rom. xv. 30-33; 1 Cor. iv. 9-13;
xv. 42-5; 2 Cor. ix. 6, 7.
</p>

<p>
44. (Evst. 232.)
</p>

<p>
45. Glasgow, Hunt. Mus. V. 3. 4 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1199], 11 × 7-7/8, ff. 239 (22),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi> Written by order of Luke of Antioch. Belonged to
Caesar de Missy.
</p>

<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>

<p>
46. Milan, Ambr. C. 63 sup. [xiv], 9-¼ × 5-3/8, ff. 153 (27), <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, bought
(like Evst. 103) in 1606, <q>Corneliani in Iapygiâ.</q>
</p>

<p>
47. (Evst. 104.)
</p>

<p>
48. (Evst. 222.)<note place='foot'>As in our preceding lists, we remove to this foot-note Scholz's six copies
seen at St. Saba, and occupy their numbers by other manuscripts. They are
Apost. 49. St. Saba 16 [xiv], 4to, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> 50. St. Saba 18 [xv], 8vo. 51. St. Saba 26
[xiv], fol. 52. (Evst. 171.) 53. (Evst. 160.) 54. St. Saba (unnumbered)
[xiii], 4to.</note> (Greg. 59.)
</p>

<p>
49. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2068 [xi], 9-¾ × 7-½, ff. 232 (24), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
at end, formerly Basil 107, described with a facsimile by Bianchini,
Evan. Quadr., vol. ii. pt. 1, p. 523 and Plate iv: ἐκλογάδιον τοῦ ἀποστόλου.
(Greg. 120.)
</p>

<p>
50. Modena, Este Libr. ii. D. 3 [xv], 11-3/8 × 7-7/8, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, seen by Burgon.
(Greg. 89.)
</p>

<p>
51. Besançon, Public Libr. 41 [xii], 9-1/8 × 6-¾, ff. 141 (21), 2 cols.
(M. Castan: <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evst. 193). (Greg. 86.)
</p>

<p>
52. Lond. Brit. Mus. 32,051 [xi, xii, Greg. xiii], 10-½ × 7-¾, ff. 192 (29),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at end, <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>, got from Heraclea by Archd. Payne for
the Duke of Marlborough, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1738. Formerly Blenheim 3. C. 12.
(Greg. 65.)
</p>

<p>
53. (Evst. 258.) (Greg. 186.)
</p>

<p>
54. (Evst. 195.) (Greg. 73.)
</p>

<p>
*55. (Evst. 179.) (Greg. 55.)
</p>

<p>
*56. (Act. 42, Evst. 287) contains only 1 Cor. ix. 2-12. (Greg. 56.)
</p>

<p>
57. Lond. Lamb. 1190 [xiii, Greg. xi], 10 × 7, ff. 130 (25), 2 cols.,
neatly written, with many letters gilded, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at the beginning and end,
and uninjured. Archdeacon Todd in the Lambeth Catalogue, p. 50,
mistakes this for a copy of the Acts and all the Epistles. Bloomfield
examined Apost. 57, 59-62. (Greg. 60.)
</p>

<p>
58. Oxf., Ch. Ch. Wake 33 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1172], 11 × 8-¼, ff. 266, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>,
the ink having quite gone in parts. (Greg. 58.)
</p>

<p>
59. Lambeth 1191 [xiii], 8 × 6-½, ff. 75 (19), much injured, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at
the beginning and end. (Greg. 61.)
</p>

<p>
60. Lamb. 1194 [xiii], 8-5/8 × 7-5/8, ff. 109 (17), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at the end,
the writing very neat, the letters often gilded. (Greg. 62.)
</p>

<p>
61. Lamb. 1195 [xiii, Greg. xv], 10-3/8 × 7-¼, ff. 75 (17), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at
the beginning. (Greg. 63.)
</p>

<p>
62. Lamb. 1196 [xiii, Greg. xii], 10-¾ × 8, ff. 219 (23), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at
the end. (Greg. 64.)
</p>

<p>
63. Instead of this, which is Act. 315 (Greg.)&mdash;
</p>

<p>
Oxford, Lincoln Coll. 4 [xii], 8 × 6, ff. 107 (?), <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> beginning and end.
</p>

<p>
*64. B.-C. I. 10 (Evst. 251). (Greg. 66.)
</p>

<p>
*65. B.-C. III. 24 [xii or xiii], 4to. (Greg. 68.)
</p>

<p>
*66. B.-C. III. 29 (Evst. 252). (Greg. 67.)
</p>

<p>
*67. B.-C. III. 42 (Evst. 253). (Greg. 184.)
</p>

<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>

<p>
*68. B.-C. III. 53 (Evst. 253<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>). (Greg. 263.)
</p>

<p>
69. Brit. Mus. Add. 29,714 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1306], 10-¾ × 8-½, ff. 178 (28), written
by one Ignatius; <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, was bought of Nicolas Parassoh in 1874. (Greg.
81.)
</p>

<p>
70. Bentley's Q = Apost. 52. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Ellis, Bentleii Crit. Sacr. xxx;
Berriman, Crit. Dissertation on 1 Tim. iii. 16, p. 105.) Instead&mdash;
</p>

<p>
Cambridge, Mass. U.S.A., Harvard Univ. 2 (A. R. g. 3. 10) [xii],
11-½ × 8-½, ff. 281 (23), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>orn.</hi> (f. 202 <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, apparently by
the same hand as Evst. 484, but more beautiful. Hoskier, App. H,
pp. 3, 4. (Greg. 75.)
</p>

<p>
*[+]71. Leipzig, Univ. Libr. Tisch. vi. f. [ix or x], 9-¾ × 7, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, f. 1 (24),
2 cols., containing Heb. i. 3-12, published in <q>Anecd. sacr. et profan.,</q>
p. 73, &amp;c. (Greg. 80.)
</p>

<p>
*[+]72. Petrop. Caes. Muralt. 38, 49 [ix], 8vo, one leaf of a double
palimpsest, now at St. Petersburg, the oldest writing containing Acts
xiii. 10; 2 Cor. xi. 21-23, cited by Tischendorf (N. T., Proleg.,
p. ccxxvi, 7th edition). (Greg. 70.)
</p>

<p>
[+]73. (Evst. 192.) (Greg. 180.)
</p>

<p>
[+]74. Oxf. Bodl. Arch. Seld. 9 supr., palimpsest, containing under the
Christmas sermons of Proclus, Patriarch of Constantinople, almost
illegible Lessons from the Septuagint, with one or two from the Epistles
of SS. Peter and John. (Greg. 84.)
</p>

<p>
75. Lond. Brit. Mus. Add. 11,841 [xii or xiii, Greg. xi], 8 × 5-½, ff. 86
(22), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> Amidst Old Test. Lections are (1) ff. 52-54, 1 John iii.
21-24, 26; iv. 9-19; 20-25; v; (2) f. 78 (which should precede f. 74)
is a Lesson for June 28 (<hi rend='text-decoration: underline'>κη</hi>) τῶν ἁγίων ἀποστόλων πέτρου καὶ παύλου, ἀνάγνωσμα
γ, containing 1 Pet. i. 3-19; ii. 11-24 (ζήσομεν). (Greg. 79.)
</p>

<p>
76. Oxf. Bodl. Misc. Gr. 319 [xiii], 11 × 8, ff. 14 (22), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>rubr.</hi>, four leaves being biblical, written by Symeon a reader, ἁγιοσυμεωνιτης:
the date, if once extant in the red letters of the colophon, being
now rubbed away. There are nine ἀναγνώσματα. The book is either
a Euchology or a Typicum, more probably the former. The first Lesson
is 2 Tim. iii. 2-9. The remainder are numbered as Lessons for the
δεκαήμερον, or Twelve days from Christmas to Epiphany: they run thus,
α᾽ Rom. v. 18-21: β᾽ viii. 3-9: γ᾽ ix. 29-33: δ᾽ 2 Cor. v. 15-21: ε᾽ Gal.
iii. 28-iv. 5: ϛ' Col. i. 18-22: ζ᾽ Phil. iii. 3-9: η᾽ Rom. viii. 8-14.
Found in a drawer by Mr. E. B. Nicholson, Bodley's Librarian. (Greg.
83.)
</p>

<p>
77. (Act. 98, portions marked as <hi rend='italic'>a</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: sub'>1</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>a</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: sub'>3</hi>.) (Greg. 82.)
</p>

<p>
78. (Evst. 290.) Lond. B.-C. III. 44 [xiv], 4to, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, of 339 surviving
leaves, is a <hi rend='italic'>Typicum</hi> in two separate hands, and contains twenty-nine
Lessons: viz. eleven from the Old Testament, six from the Apocrypha,
two from the Gospels (Matt. xi. 27-30; Mark viii. 34-ix. 1), ten from
St. Paul's Epistles. (Greg. 78.)
</p>

<p>
79. Camb. Univ. Libr. Add. 679. 2 [xii or xiii], 10 × 8-¼, ff. 102 (18),
being the companion volume to Evst. 291, contains week-day Epistles
<pb n='372'/><anchor id='Pg372'/>
from St. Paul. The first quire is in a different hand. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> six leaves.
Ends sixth day of thirty-third week (2 Thess. ii. 1). (Greg. 77.)
</p>

<p>
80. (Evst. 292.) (Greg. 183.)
</p>

<p>
81. = Apost. 52. Instead&mdash;
</p>

<p>
Milan, Ambros. C. 16 inf. [xiii], 9 × 7-¼, ff. 29 (34), 2 cols. (Greg.
112.)
</p>

<p>
Scholz says of Evst. 161, and to the same effect Coxe of Evst. Cairo
18, <q>continet lect. et pericop.;</q> which may possibly mean that these
copies should be reckoned for the Apostolos also.
</p>

<p>
82. Messina, Univ. 93 [xii or xiii], 9-7/8 × 7-¾, ff. 331 (22), 2 cols.,
perfect. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 113.)
</p>

<p>
83. Crypta Ferrata, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.</hi> β. 4 [x], 5-7/8 × 4-¾, ff. 139 (19), <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, Praxapostolos.
(<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 103.)
</p>

<p>
84. Crypta Ferrata, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.</hi> β. 5 [xi], 7-½ × 6-¼, ff. 245 (20), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi>, a most beautiful codex. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 104.)
</p>

<p>
85. Crypta Ferrata, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.</hi> β. 7 [xi], 5-7/8 × 4-¾, ff. 64 (27), <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, Praxapostolos.
(<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 105.)
</p>

<p>
86. Crypta Ferrata, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.</hi> β. 8 [xii or xiii, Greg. xiv], 6-¼ × 4-¾, ff. 27 (16),
carelessly written, and injured by damp, fragments, Praxapostolos. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi>
Greg. 106.)
</p>

<p>
87. Crypta Ferrata, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.</hi> β. 9 [xii], 5-7/8 × 4-¼, ff. 104 (22), Praxapostolos.
(<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 107.)
</p>

<p>
88. Crypta Ferrata, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.</hi> β. 10 [xiii], 6-¼ × 5-1/8, ff. 16 (22), <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, fragmentary,
with unusual Saints' days. (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 108.)
</p>

<p>
89. Crypta Ferrata, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.</hi> β. 11 [xi], 11-3/8 × 8-5/8. ff. 191 (25), 2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus.
rubr.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 109.)
</p>

<p>
90. (Evst. 322.) Crypta Ferrata. (Greg. 102.)
</p>

<p>
91. (Evst. 323.) Crypta Ferrata. (Greg. 197.)
</p>

<p>
92. (Evst. 325.) Crypta Ferrata. (Greg. 198.)
</p>

<p>
93. (Evst. 327.) Crypta Ferrata. (Greg. 172.)
</p>

<p>
94. (Evst. 328.) Crypta Ferrata. (Greg. 173.)
</p>

<p>
95. (Evst. 334.) Crypta Ferrata. (Greg. 201.)
</p>

<p>
96. (Evst. 337.) Crypta Ferrata. (Greg. 200.)
</p>

<p>
97. (Evst. 339.) Crypta Ferrata. (Greg. 201.)
</p>

<p>
98. Venice, St. Mark ii. 115 [xi or xii], 12-½ × 9-¼, ff. 277 (21-23),
2 cols., <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Greg. 124.)
</p>

<p>
99. (Evst. 341.) Crypta Ferrata. (Greg. 202.)
</p>

<p>
100. (Evst. 344.) Crypta Ferrata. (Greg. 203.)
</p>

<p>
101. (Evst. 346.) Crypta Ferrata. (Greg. 204.)
</p>

<p>
102. (Evst. 347.) Crypta Ferrata. (Greg. 205.)
</p>

<p>
103. (Evst. 349.) Crypta Ferrata. (Greg. 206.)
</p>

<p>
104. (Evst. 350.) Crypta Ferrata. (Greg. 207.)
</p>

<pb n='373'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>

<p>
105. (Evst. 351.) Crypta Ferrata. (Greg. 169.)
</p>

<p>
106. (Evst. 352.) Crypta Ferrata. (Greg. 208.)
</p>

<p>
107. (Evst. 353.) Crypta Ferrata. (Greg. 209.)
</p>

<p>
108. (Evst. 354.) Crypta Ferrata. (Greg. 210.)
</p>

<p>
109. (Evst. 356.) Crypta Ferrata. (Greg. 211.)
</p>

<p>
110. (Evst. 357.) Crypta Ferrata. (Greg. 212.)
</p>

<p>
111. (Evst. 358.) Crypta Ferrata. (Greg. 213.)
</p>

<p>
112. (Evst. 312.) Messina, fragm. (Greg. 214.)
</p>

<p>
113. (Evst. 575.) Syracuse, Seminario 4, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, ff. 219, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>, given
by the Card. Landolina. (Greg. 228.)
</p>

<p>
114. Venice, St. Mark ii. 128 [xiv], 8-½ × 6, ff. 361 (19), <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi>
Greg. 125.)
</p>

<p>
115. (Evst. 931.) Ven. St. Mark ii. 130. (Greg. 126.)
</p>

<p>
116. Rom. Vat. Gr. 368 [xiii], 10 × 7-¾, ff. 136 (26), 2 cols., Old Test.
Lections at end. (Greg. 118.)
</p>

<p>
117. (Evst. 381) Vat. (Greg. 264.)
</p>

<p>
118. (Evst. 387) Vat. (Greg. 223.)
</p>

<p>
119. Rom. Vat. Gr. 2116 [xiii], 7-½ × 5-¼, ff. 111 (21), <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>  (<hi rend='italic'>See</hi>
Greg. 121.)
</p>

<p>
120. Rom. Vat. Alex. Gr. 11 [xiv, Greg. xii], 11 × 7-7/8, ff. 169 (24),
<hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> (Greg. 123.)
</p>

<p>
121. (Evst. 395.) Rom. Vat. Alex. 59. (Greg. 227.)
</p>

<p>
122. Rom. Vat. Alex. Gr. 70 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1544], 7-7/8 × 5-¼, ff. 18, <q>in fronte
pronunciatio Graeca Latinis literis descripta.</q> (Greg. 255.)
</p>

<p>
123. Rom. Vat. Pal. 241 [xv], 8-5/8 × 7-¾, ff. 149 (21), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> (Greg.
122.)
</p>

<p>
124. (Evst. 410.) Rom. Barb. (Greg. 216.)
</p>

<p>
125. Rom. Barb. iv. 11 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1566], 8-¾ × 6-¼, ff. 158 (19), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
(Greg. 114.)
</p>

<p>
126. Rom. Barb. iv. 60 [xi, Greg. xii], 9-7/8 × 7-¾, ff. 322 (22), <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi>,
a fine codex with <hi rend='italic'>menologium</hi>. (Greg. 115.)
</p>

<p>
127. Rom. Barb. iv. 84 [xiii, Greg. xii], 11 × 7-¾, ff. 189 (24), 2 cols.,
with <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> (Greg. 116.)
</p>

<p>
128. (Evst. 415.) Martin. (Greg. 256.)
</p>

<p>
129. (Evst. 96.) Martin. (Greg. 262.)
</p>

<p>
130. Par. Nat Suppl. Gr. 800 [xiv], 8-5/8 × 5-7/8, ff. 115 (23), <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
at end. Martin, p. 174. (Greg. 88.)
</p>

<p>
131. Athos, Docheiariou 20.
</p>

<p>
132. Athos, Docheiariou 27.
</p>

<p>
133. Athos, Docheiariou 141.
</p>

<p>
134. Athos, Docheiariou 146.
</p>

<p>
135. Athos, Iveron 831.
</p>

<p>
136. Athos, Caracalla 10.
</p>

<p>
137. Athos, Caracalla 156.
</p>

<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/>

<p>
138. Athos, Constamonitou 21 [xvii], 8vo, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
</p>

<p>
139. Athos, Constamonitou 22 [xiv], 8vo, cotton.
</p>

<p>
140. Athos, Constamonitou 23 [xv], 8vo, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> (Σπ. Λαμπρός.)
</p>

<p>
141. Athos, Coutloumoussi 277.
</p>

<p>
142. Athos, Coutloumoussi 344.
</p>

<p>
143. Athos, Coutloumoussi 355.
</p>

<p>
144. Athos, Protaton 54.
</p>

<p>
145. Athos, Simopetra 6.
</p>

<p>
146. Athos, Simopetra 10.
</p>

<p>
147. (Evst. 479.) Athos, Simopetra 148.
</p>

<p>
148. Athos, Simopetra 149.
</p>

<p>
149. Athos, Simopetra 150.
</p>

<p>
150. Athos, Simopetra 151.
</p>

<p>
151. Athos, Stauroniketa 129.
</p>

<p>
152. Athos, Philotheou 17.
</p>

<p>
153. Beratinus, Abp.
</p>

<p>
154. Chalcis, Mon. Holy Trinity 13.
</p>

<p>
155. Chalcis, Mon. Holy Trin. 14.
</p>

<p>
156. Chalcis, Mon. Holy Trin. 15.
</p>

<p>
157. Chalcis, School 59.
</p>

<p>
158. Chalcis, School 74.
</p>

<p>
159. Chalcis, School 88.
</p>

<p>
160. Patmos 11.
</p>

<p>
161. Patmos 12.
</p>

<p>
162. Thessalonica, Ἑλλην. Γυμν. 8.
</p>

<p>
163. Thess. Ἑλλην. Γυμν. 10.
</p>

<p>
164. Thess. Ἑλλην. Γυμν. 13.
</p>

<p>
165. Sinai 296.
</p>

<p>
166. Sinai 297.
</p>

<p>
167. Sinai 298.
</p>

<p>
168. Sinai 299.
</p>

<p>
169. Athos, Dionysius 386. (Greg. 127.)
</p>

<p>
170. (Evst. 642.)
</p>

<p>
171. Petersburg, Caes. Muralt. 38. (Greg. 70<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
172. Petersburg, Caes. Muralt. 49. (Greg. 70<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
173. Petersburg, Caes. Muralt. 40<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>. (Greg. 71.)
</p>

<p>
174. Sinai 294.
</p>

<p>
175. (Evst. 261.)
</p>

<p>
176. (Evst. 240.)
</p>

<p>
177. (Evst. 232.)
</p>

<p>
178. (Evst. 191.) (Greg. twice, 69 and 178.)
</p>

<p>
179. (Evst. 472.)
</p>

<p>
180. Athos, Dionysius 387. (Greg. 128.)
</p>

<p>
181. (Evst. 166.)
</p>

<p>
182. (Evst. 169.)
</p>

<p>
183. Petersburg, Caes. Muralt. 45<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>. (Greg. 72.)
</p>

<p>
184. Athos, Dionysius 392. (Greg. 129.)
</p>

<p>
185. (Evst. 275.)
</p>

<p>
186. Docheiariou 17. (Greg. 130.)
</p>

<p>
187. (Evst. 420.)
</p>

<p>
188. (Evst. 571.)
</p>

<p>
189. (Evst. 572.)
</p>

<p>
190. (Evst. 573.)
</p>

<p>
191. (Evst. 804.)
</p>

<p>
192. (Evst. 828.)
</p>

<p>
193. (Evst. 439.)
</p>

<p>
194. (Evst. 440.)
</p>

<p>
195. (Evst. 443.)
</p>

<p>
196. (Evst. 446.)
</p>

<p>
197. Petersburg, Caes. Mur. 110. (Greg. 74.)
</p>

<pb n='375'/><anchor id='Pg375'/>

<p>
198. New York, Astor's Library. (Greg. 76.)
</p>

<p>
199. (Evst. 290.)
</p>

<p>
200. Vienna, Caes. Gr. Theol. 308. (Greg. 85.)
</p>

<p>
201. Par. Nat. Gr. 922, fol. A. (Greg. 87<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
202. Par. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 804, ff. 88 and 89. (Greg. 87<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>.)
</p>

<p>
[+]203. Wisbech, Peckover, <hi rend='italic'>Unc.</hi>, palimpsest. (Greg. 90.)
</p>

<p>
204. Athens, Nat. 68 (203) [xiii], 10-5/8 × 8-5/8, ff. 218, <hi rend='italic'>mus.</hi> (Greg. 91.)
</p>

<p>
205. Athens, Nat. 69 (206), [xv], 8-5/8 × 5-7/8, ff. 347, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> (Greg. 92.)
</p>

<p>
206. (Evst. 393.) Athens, Nat. (35) ? (Greg. 93.)
</p>

<p>
207. (Evst. 422.) Athens, Nat. (63). (Greg. 94).
</p>

<p>
208. (Evst. 423.) Athens, Nat. (64) <hi rend='italic'>sic.</hi> (Greg. 95.)
</p>

<p>
209. Ath. Nat. 95 (115) [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1576], 8-½ × 5-7/8, ff. 192, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at beg.
(Greg. 96.)
</p>

<p>
210. Athens, Nat. ? (Greg. 97 ?)
</p>

<p>
211. Athens, Nat. ? (116 ?) [xv], 8-5/8 × 5-7/8, ff. 141. (Greg. 98.)
</p>

<p>
212. Athens, Nat. ? (114) [xvii], 8-¼ × 6-¼, ff. 190. (Greg. 99.)
</p>

<p>
213. Sinai 295. (Greg. 117.)
</p>

<p>
214. Escurial N. iv. 9. (Greg. 100.)
</p>

<p>
215. (Evst. 410.)
</p>

<p>
216. Escurial Ψ. iii. 9. (Greg. 101.)
</p>

<p>
217. (Evst. 408.)
</p>

<p>
218. (Evst. 407.)
</p>

<p>
219. (Evst. 533.)
</p>

<p>
220. (Evst. 548.)
</p>

<p>
221. (Evst. 554.)
</p>

<p>
222. (Evst. 555.)
</p>

<p>
223. Florence, Laurent. St. Mark 704. (Greg. 111.)
</p>

<p>
224. (Evst. 557.)
</p>

<p>
225. (Evst. 558.)
</p>

<p>
226. (Evst. 572.)
</p>

<p>
227. Lesbos, τ. Λείμωνος μονῆς 55, Act., Paul., Cath., Apoc., <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>proll.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mus. rubr.</hi> (Kerameus.)
</p>

<p>
228. Lesb. τ. Λείμ. μον. 137 [xv], 8-1/8 × 4-7/8, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi> (Kerameus.)
</p>

<p>
229. (Evst. 680.)
</p>

<p>
230. (Evst. 686.)
</p>

<p>
231. (Evst. 687.)
</p>

<p>
232. (Evst. 693.)
</p>

<p>
233. (Evst. 707.)
</p>

<p>
234. (Evst. 709.)
</p>

<p>
235. (Evst. 712.)
</p>

<p>
236. (Evst. 721.)
</p>

<p>
237. (Evst. 741.)
</p>

<p>
238. (Evst. 743.)
</p>

<p>
239. (Evst. 751.)
</p>

<p>
240. (Evst. 755.)
</p>

<p>
241. (Evst. 757.)
</p>

<p>
242. (Evst. 759.)
</p>

<p>
243. (Evst. 797.)
</p>

<p>
244. (Evst. 829.)
</p>

<p>
245. (Evst. 837.)
</p>

<p>
246. (Evst. 893.)
</p>

<p>
247. (Evst. 900.)
</p>

<p>
248. (Evst. 908.)
</p>

<p>
249. (Evst. 911.)
</p>

<p>
250. (Evst. 915.)
</p>

<pb n='376'/><anchor id='Pg376'/>

<p>
251. (Evst. 916.)
</p>

<p>
252. (Evst. 917.)
</p>

<p>
253. (Evst. 924.)
</p>

<p>
254. (Evst. 929.)
</p>

<p>
255. Andros, Μονὴ Ἁγία 2, ff. 140. Injured, but well written. (Ἀντ.
Μηλιαράκης.)
</p>

<p>
256. Andros, Μονὴ Ἁγία 3, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, moth-eaten.  (Ἀντώνιος Μηλιαράκης.)
</p>

<p>
257. (Evst. 428.)
</p>

<p>
258. (Evst. 272.)
</p>

<p>
259. (Evst. 518.)
</p>

<p>
260. (Evst. 894.)
</p>

<p>
261. (Evst. 895.)
</p>

<p>
262. Athos, Protaton 32, 4to, amidst other matter, κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>syn.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>men.</hi>
(Σπ. Λαμπρός.)
</p>

<p>
263. Crypta Ferrata, Α'. δ᾽. 24. (Greg. 110.)
</p>

<p>
264. (Evst. 952.)
</p>

<p>
265. (Evst. 30.)
</p>

<p>
266. Athos, Gregory 60 [xvi], 16mo, <hi rend='italic'>chart.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi>
</p>

<p>
267. Kosinitsa, Ἁγία Μονή, Ἰωάννης ὁ Περευτέσης (?) 198 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1503],
written by the aforenamed.
</p>

<p>
268. Kos. Ἁγ. Μον., Νίκολλος 55 [xi], written by the aforenamed.
</p>

<p>
269. Kos. Ἁγ. Μον., Συμέων Λουτζέρες 195 [<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1505], written by the
aforenamed.
</p>

<p>
270. Ath. Nat. Libr. 101 [xiv], 9 × 7-1/8, ff. 169, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at beginning and
end.
</p>

<p>
271. Ath. Nat. Libr. 102 [xvii], 8-5/8 × 6-¼, ff. 229.
</p>

<p>
272. Ath. Nat. Libr. 106 [xiv-xv], 9-½ × 7-1/8, ff. 243, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at beginning
and end.
</p>

<p>
273. Ath. Nat. Libr. 133 [xiv], 8-5/8 × 5-½, ff. 348, <hi rend='italic'>pict.</hi>
</p>

<p>
274. Ath. Nat. Libr. 144 [xv], 8-¼ × 5-7/8, ff. 76, <hi rend='italic'>mut.</hi> at beginning and
end.
</p>

<p>
275. (Evst. 956.)
</p>

<p>
276. (Evst. 957.)
</p>

<p>
277. (Evst. 958.)
</p>

<p>
278. (Evst. 959.)
</p>

<p>
279. (Evst. 960.)
</p>

<p>
280. (Evst. 961.)
</p>

<p>
281. (Evst. 962.)
</p>

<p>
282. (Evst. 963.)
</p>

<p>
283. (Evst. 964.)
</p>

<p>
284. (Evst. 965.)
</p>

<p>
285. (Evst. 966.)
</p>

<p>
286. (Evst. 967.)
</p>

<p>
287. (Evst. 968.)
</p>

<p>
288. (Evst. 498.)
</p>

<pb n='377'/><anchor id='Pg377'/>

<div>
<head>Additional Uncials.</head>

<p>
ג. At Kosinitsa, Ἁγία Μονή 124 [x], 10-7/8 × 7, ff. 339, Evan., Act., Cath.,
Apoc., Paul. (<hi rend='italic'>sic</hi>). Written by Sabbas, a monk, in tenth century, with
marginal writing [xiii].
</p>

<p>
ד. At Kosinitsa, Ἁγ. Μον. 375 [ix-x], 7-1/8 × 13, ff. 301 (16, 19, or 21).
The two first gatherings are mice-eaten. Τίτλοι in vermilion, ἀναγνώσματα,
κεφ. <hi rend='italic'>t.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>subscr.</hi>, Evan. <hi rend='italic'>Mut.</hi> Matt. i. 1-ix. 1.
</p>

<p>
ה. <hi rend='italic'>a.</hi> Athos, Protaton 13 [vi], 4to, ff. 2, appended to Homilies of
Chrysostom, and containing fragments of the Evangelists.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>b.</hi> Athos, Protaton 14 [vi], ff. 3, with fragments of St. John appended
at beginning and end to Lives of Saints.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>c.</hi> Athos, Protaton 20 [vi], 2 cols.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>d.</hi> Athos, Protaton 56 [vi], ff. 10, 2 cols., at beginning and end of a
hortatory discourse [xiv], containing fragments of the Evangelists.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Total Number Of Greek Manuscripts
As Reckoned In The Six Classes</head>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Uncials</hi>:&mdash;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evangelia: 71</l>
<l>Acts and Catholic Epistles: 19</l>
<l>St. Paul's Epistles: 27</l>
<l>Apocalypse: 7</l>
<l>Total: 124</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Cursives:&mdash;</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evangelia: 1321</l>
<l>Acts and Catholic Epistles: 420</l>
<l>St. Paul's Epistles: 491</l>
<l>Apocalypse: 184</l>
<l>Evangelistaria: 963</l>
<l>Apostolos: 288</l>
<l>Total: 3667</l>
<l>Grand Total:  3791</l>
</lg>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='378'/><anchor id='Pg378'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Appendix_A'/>
<head>Appendix A. Chief Authorities.</head>

<p>
The chief authorities used in corrections and additions in this Edition
have been as follows:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
1. MS. Notes and other remains of Dr. Scrivener, such as <q>Adversaria
Critica Sacra,</q> just being published.
</p>

<p>
2. My own examination of the MSS. in London, Oxford, and Cambridge,
with obliging help as to those in the British Museum from Mr. G. F.
Warner, of the MSS. Department.
</p>

<p>
3. Burgon's Letters to the <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, 1873-74, 1882, and 1884.
</p>

<p>
4. As to Parisian MSS., the Abbé Martin's <q>Description technique des
MSS. Grecs relatifs au N. Test., conservés dans les Bibliothèques de
Paris,</q> Paris, 1884. And Omont's <q>Facsimilés des MSS. Grecs datés de
la Bibliothèque Nationale du ix et du xiv.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. Κατάλογος τῶν Χειρογράφων τῆς Ἐθνικῆς Βιβλιοθήκης τῆς Ἕλλαδος ὑπὸ
Ἰωάννου Σακκελίωνος καὶ Ἀλκιβιάδου Ἰ. Σακκελίωνος. Ἐν Ἀθήναις, 1892.
</p>

<p>
6. Ἱεροσολυμιτικὴ Βιβλιοθήκη, ἤτοι Κατάλογος τῶν ἐν ταῖς Βιβλιοθήκαις τοῦ
ἁγιωτάτου ἀποστολικοῦ τε καὶ καθολικοῦ ὀρθοδόξου πατριαρχικοῦ θρόνου τῶν Ἱεροσολύμων
καὶ πάσης Παλαιστίνης ἀποκειμένων Ἑλληνίκων Κωδίκων, κ.τ.λ.: ὑπὸ Παπαδοπούλου
Κεραμέως, κ.τ.λ.  Ἐν Πετροπόλει, 1891.
</p>

<p>
7. Ἐν Κωνσταντινουπόλει Ἑλληνικὸς Φιλολογικὸς Σύλλογος. Μαυρογορδάτειος
Βιβλιοθήκη. Παραρτήματα τοῦ ΙΕ Τόμου (1884), τοῦ Ιϛ Τόμου (1885), τοῦ ΙΖ
Τόμου (1886), τοῦ ΙΗ Τόμου (1888).  Ἐν Κωνσταντινουπόλει.
</p>

<p>
8. Ὕπομνήματα Περιγραφικὰ τὸν Κυκλάδων Νήσων κατὰ μέρος ὑπὸ Ἀντωνίου
Μηλιαράκη. Ἄνδρος, Κέως, ὑπὸ Ἁ. Παπαδοπούλου τοῦ Κεραμέως. Ἐν Ἀθήναις,
1880.
</p>

<p>
9. Ἔκθεσις Παλαιογραφικῶν καὶ φιλολογικῶν Ἐρεύνων ἐν Θράκῃ καὶ Μακεδονίᾳ:
ὑπὸ Α. Παπαδοπούλου Κεραμέως. Ἐν Κωνσταντινουπόλει, 1886.
</p>

<p>
10. Κατάλογος τῶν ἐν ταῖς Βιβλιοθήκαις τοῦ Ἁγίου Ὄρους Ἑλληνικῶν Κωδίκων:
ὑπὸ Σπυρίδωνος Π. Λάμπρου.
</p>

<p>
11. Catalogus Codicum Bibliotheca Imperialis Publicae Gr. et Lat.
Edvardus de Muralto. Petropoli, 1840.
</p>

<p>
12. And especially the learned Prolegomena to Tischendorf, 8th
edition, drawn up and issued by Dr. C. R. Gregory, who has with the
greatest diligence examined a vast number of MSS. on the spot. I have
had a difficult task in steering between my duty to the learned public <emph>in
<pb n='379'/><anchor id='Pg379'/>
the short time</emph> allowed me for the preparation of this edition, and the
desire of Dr. Gregory that I should not take more of the information
supplied in his work than I could help. What I have chiefly done has
been to insert his measurements, where I could obtain no others, translating
them into inches, and some other particulars upon such MSS. as
had been already described in the third edition. In the case of the newly-discovered
MSS., which have been first recorded by Dr. Gregory, I have
only mentioned them, with a general reference to Dr. Gregory's book,
except where information from other sources has come to hand. I have
the pleasure of paying a tribute in the case of MSS. which I have
examined upon his track to the great skill and accuracy of his
examinations.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Appendix_B'/>
<head>Appendix B. On Facsimiles.</head>

<p>
Since the application of photography in its more perfect forms to
manuscripts for the purpose of representing their character accurately to
scholars who have no opportunity of examining the manuscripts for themselves,
the older facsimiles have in greater measure lost their value. It
seems, therefore, hardly worth while to refer to the collections of facsimiles
made by Montfaucon, or Bianchini, or Silvestre, or Westwood,
other representations when they are to be had being so much more
faithful and instructive.
</p>

<p>
The following are some of the most valuable of recent collections:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
1. Palaeographical Society, Facsimiles of MSS. and Inscriptions, ed.
E. A. Bond, E. M. Thompson, and G. F. Warner, first series, 3 vols.,
London, 1873-1883; second series, 1884, &amp;c., in progress, fol.
</p>

<p>
This collection contains the following Gr. Test. MSS.:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Series I.</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>B, Plate 104.</l>
<l>א, Plate 105.</l>
<l>A, Plate 106.</l>
<l>D, 14, 15.</l>
<l>D, Clarom. 63, 64.</l>
<l>E, Laudianus, 80.</l>
<l>Evst., Parham, 83.</l>
<l>Brit. Mus. Harl. 5598, 26, 27.</l>
<l>Brit. Mus. Add. 17,470, 202.</l>
<l>Rom. Vat. Gr. 1208, 131.</l>
<l>Brit. Mus. Add. 28,816, 843.</l>
<l>Brit. Mus. Add. 28,818, 204.</l>
<l>Brit. Mus. Add. 22,506, 205.</l>
<l>Brit. Mus. Add. 19,993, 206.</l>
<l>Camb. Trin. Coll. B. 17. 1, 127.</l>
<l>Δ, Sangallensis, semi-uncial, 179.</l>
<l>Codex Argenteus (Gothic), 118.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Series II.</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>Oxf. Bodl. Misc. Gr. 313, 7.</l>
<l>Rom. Vat. Gr. 2138, 87.</l>
</lg>

<p>
2. A considerable selection from the large assemblage of MSS. at Paris
has been issued in facsimile by M. Omont, in his three volumes, published
<pb n='380'/><anchor id='Pg380'/>
in 1887, 1890, and 1892 respectively, viz. Facsimilés des Manuscrits
Grecs des xv et xiv siècles, reproduits en photolithographie d'après les
originaux de la Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris, 4to.
</p>

<p>
Facsimilés des Manuscrits Grecs datés de la Bibliothèque Nationale du
ix<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> au xiv<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> siècle, Paris, fol.
</p>

<p>
Facsimilés des plus anciens Manuscrits Grecs en onciale et en minuscule
de la Bibliothèque Nationale du iv<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> au xii<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> siècle, Paris, fol.
</p>

<p>
3. For Spain, Martin (A.), Facsimilés des Manuscrits d'Espagne, gravés
d'après les photographies de Charles Graux, 2 vols., Paris, 1891, 8vo
and atlas.
</p>

<p>
4. Wattenbach (W.) and Velsen (A. von), Exempla Codicum Graecorum
literis minusculis scriptorum, Heidelberg, 1878, fol.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Appendix C. On Dating By Indiction.</head>

<p>
Some account of the old way of dating Greek MSS. by indiction has
been already given (p. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, n. 2), but it may be convenient to our readers
to have a fuller description to refer to. Such a description may be found
in Mr. Maunde Thompson's admirable Manual on Greek and Latin
Palaeography, pp. 322-3, which, by the kind permission of the author,
is reproduced here.
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Mediaeval Greek MSS. are dated sometimes by the year of the
indiction, sometimes by the year of the world according to the era of
Constantinople, sometimes by both indiction and year of the world.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The Indiction was a cycle of fifteen years, which are severally styled
Indiction 1, Indiction 2, &amp;c., up to Indiction 15, when the series begins
afresh. The introduction of this system is attributed to Constantine the
Great. From the circumstance of the commencement of the indiction
being reckoned variously from different days, four kinds of indictions have
been recognized, viz.:&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>i. The Indiction of Constantinople, calculated from the 1st of September,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 312.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>ii. The Imperial or Caesarian Indiction (commonly used in England
and France), beginning on the 24th of September, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 312.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>iii. The Roman or Pontifical Indiction (commonly used in dating papal
bulls from the ninth to the fourteenth century), beginning on the 1st of
January (or the 25th of December, when that day was reckoned as the
first day of the year), <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 313.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>iv. The Indiction used in the register of the parliament of Paris,
beginning in October.</q>
</p>

<pb n='381'/><anchor id='Pg381'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The Greeks made use of the Indiction of Constantinople<note place='foot'>An independent mode of reckoning the commencement of the indiction was
followed in Egypt under the later Roman Empire. The indiction there began
normally in the latter half of the month Pauni, which corresponds to about the
middle of June; but the actual day of commencement appears to have been
variable and to have depended upon the exact period of the rising of the Nile.&mdash;<q>Catalogue
of Greek Papyri in the British Museum,</q> pp. 197, 198.</note>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>To find the indiction of a year of the Christian era, add 3 to the year
(because <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1= Indiction 4), and divide the sum by 15: if nothing
remains, the indiction will be 15; if there is a remainder, it will be the
number of the indiction. But it must not be forgotten that the Indiction
of Constantinople begins on the first of September, and consequently that
the last four months of a year of the Christian era belong to the next
indiction year.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The year of the Creation of the World was calculated, according to
the era of Constantinople, to be <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 5508. The first day of the year was
the 1st of September.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>To reduce the Mundane era of Constantinople to the Christian era,
deduct 5508 from the former for the months of January to August; and
5509 for September to December.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>A chronological table, showing the corresponding years of the Mundane
era, the Christian era, and the Indiction, from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 800 to <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1599,
will be found in Gardthausen's <q>Griechische Palaeographie,</q> pp. 450-459.</q>
</p>

<p>
Mr. Thompson also refers to an article by Mr. Kenyon in <hi rend='italic'>The Classical
Review</hi>, March, 1893, p. 110, where the Egyptian puzzle is noticed, to
one by Wilcken in <q>Hermes,</q> xxviii. p. 230, and one by Viereck in
<q>Philologus,</q> lii. p. 219, and generally to the interesting and valuable
Introduction to the British Museum upon Greek Papyri.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Appendix D. On The Rhemata'/>
<head>Appendix D. On The ῥηματα.</head>

<p>
The following ingenious and probably sound explanation of what has
been long a <emph>crux</emph> to Textual Critics, comes from a Lecture by Mr. Rendel
Harris, <q>On the Origin of the Ferrar Group,</q> delivered at Mansfield
College, Oxford, on Nov. 6, 1893, and since published (C. J. Clay and
Sons), and courteously sent to the editor by the accomplished author.
The explanation is given in Mr. Harris' own words (pp. 7-10): but the
whole of his pamphlet should be consulted by those who are interested in
this study.
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In Scrivener's Introduction to the New Testament (ed. 3, p. 65) we
are told that <q>besides the division of the text into στίχοι or lines, we find
in the Gospels alone another division into ῥήματα or ῥήσεις, <q>sentences,</q>
differing but little from the στίχοι in number. Of these last the precise
<pb n='382'/><anchor id='Pg382'/>
numbers vary in different copies, though not considerably, &amp;c.</q> And on
p. 66 we find the following statistical statement:</q>
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Matthew has 2522 ῥήματα</q></l>
<l>Mark, 1675</l>
<l>Luke, 3803</l>
<l>John, 1938</l>
</lg>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>These figures are derived from MSS. of the Gospels, in which we
frequently find the attestation given both of the ῥήματα and the στίχοι:
e.g. Cod. Ev. 173 gives for</q>
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Matthew ,βφκβ᾽ ῥήματα, ,βφξ᾽ στίχοι,</q></l>
</lg>

<p>
while the corresponding figures for Mark and Luke are
</p>

<lg>
<l>Mark ,αχοε' ,αχδ᾽ and Luke ,γωγ᾽ ,βψν᾽</l>
</lg>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>No explanation, as far as I know, has ever been given of these curiously
numbered ῥήματα. The word is, certainly, a peculiar one to use, if short
sentences are intended, such as are commonly known by the terms <q>cola
and commata.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>It has occurred to me that perhaps the explanation might lie in the
fact that ῥῆμα was here a literal translation of the Syriac word
ܦܬܓܡܐ (or ܐܡܓܬܦ).
Let us then see whether ܦܬܓܡܐ (or ܐܡܓܬܦ) is the proper word to describe a verse,
either a fixed verse, like a hexameter, or a sense-line. A reference to
Payne Smith's Lexicon will show that it may be used in either of these
senses, for example, we are told that it is not only used generally of the
verses of Scripture, but that it may stand for <q><hi rend='italic'>comma, membrum versus,
sententia brevior quam versus,</hi> στίχος, Schol. ad Hex. Job. ix. 33;
ܦܬܓܡܐ ܡܒ (or ܒܡ ܐܡܓܬܦ), Tit. ib. Ps. ix; ܦܬܓܡܐ  ܐܠܦܐܒ (or ܒܐܦܠܐ ܐܡܓܬܦ). Ex. xxx. 22
marg.: insunt in Geneseos libro ܦܬܓܡܐ (or ܐܡܓܬܦ) <hi rend='smallcaps'>mmmmdix</hi>, coloph. ad Gen., it.
C.S.B. 2 et sic ad fin. cuiusque libri; in libris poeticis sententia est
hemistichio minor, e.g. in Ps. i. insunt versus sex sed ܦܬ ܞܕ (or ܕܞ ܬܦ); in
Ps. ii. versus duodecim, sed ܦܬ ܠܚ (or ܚܠ ܬܦ).</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>It seems, therefore, to be used in Syriac much in the same way as
στίχος in Greek.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Now there is in one of the Syriac MSS. on Mount Sinai (Cod. Sin. Syr.)
a table of the Canonical books of the Old and New Testaments with their
measured verses. We will give some extracts from this table; but first,
notice that the Gospels are numbered as follows:</q>
</p>

<lg>
<l>Matthew has 2522 ܦܬܓܡܐ (or ܐܡܓܬܦ)</l>
<l>Mark has 1675</l>
<l>Luke has 3083</l>
<l>John has 1737</l>
</lg>

<p>
and the whole of the four Evangelists 9218, which differs slightly from
the total formed by addition, which, as the figures stand, is 9017.
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>On comparing the table with the numbers given by Scrivener from
Greek MSS., viz.</q>
</p>

<pb n='383'/><anchor id='Pg383'/>

<lg>
<l>Matt. = 2522 ῥήματα</l>
<l>Mark  = 1675</l>
<l>Luke  = 3803</l>
<l>John  = 1938</l>
</lg>

<p>
we see at a glance that we are dealing with the same system; Luke
should evidently have 3083, the Greek number being evidently an excessive
one; and if we assume that John should be 1938 the total
amounts exactly to the 9218 given for the four Gospels.
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>This is very curious, and since the ῥήματα are now proved to be rightly
equated to ܦܬܓܡܐ (or ܐܡܓܬܦ), and this latter word is a proper word to describe
a verse or στίχος, the ῥήματα appear to be a translation of a Syriac table.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Perhaps we may get some further idea about the character of the
verses in question by turning to the Sinai list, which is not confined
to the Gospels, but ranges through the whole of the Old and New
Testaments.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The Stichometry in question follows the list of the names of the
seventy disciples, which list is here assigned to Irenaeus, bishop of
Lugdunum. After which we have</q>
</p>

<pgIf output='pdf'>
  <then>
<lg>
<l>ܐܒܬܒܕ  ܐܢܝܢܠܘܕ  ܐܢܒܦܘܚ  ܒܘܬ</l>
<l>ܬܐ ܐܠܘܓܬܦ ܠܘܟܕ ܃ܐܫܝܕܩ</l>
<l>ܐܬܕܒ ܃ܢܡ ܕܚ ܕܚܠ</l>
<l>ܐܡܫܡܝܘ ܢܞܦܠܐ ܐܠܒܕܐ  ܐܡܓܬܦ</l>
<l>܃ܣܠܬܬܫܘ</l>
</lg>
  </then>
  <else>
<lg>
<l>ܬܘܒ ܚܘܦܒܢܐ ܕܘܠܢܝܢܐ ܕܒܬܒܐ</l>
<l>ܩܕܝܫܐ܃ ܕܟܘܠ ܦܬܓܘܠܐ ܐܬ</l>
<l>ܠܚܕ ܚܕ ܡܢ܃ ܒܕܬܐ</l>
<l>ܦܬܓܡܐ ܐܕܒܠܐ ܐܠܦܞܢ ܘܝܡܫܡܐ</l>
<l>ܘܫܬܬܠܣ܃</l>
</lg>
  </else>
</pgIf>

<lg>
<l>i.e.	Genesis has 4516 verses followed by:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 15'>Exodus               3378</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 15'>Leviticus            2684</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 15'>Numbers              3481</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 15'>Deuteronomy          2982</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 15'>Total for the Law   17041</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 15'>Joshua               1953</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 15'>Judges               2088</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 15'>&amp;c.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>When we come to the New Testament, it seems at first sight as if the
verses which are there reckoned cannot be the Greek equivalent hexameters:
for we are told that Philemon contains 53 verses, and the
Epistle to Titus 116, numbers which are in excess of the Euthalian
reckoning, 38 and 97 verses respectively, and similarly in other cases.
The suggestion arises that the lines here reckoned are sense lines, and
this is therefore the meaning to be attached to the ῥήματα of the MSS.
But upon this point we must not speak too hastily.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The interest of the Sinai stichometry is not limited to this single
point: its list of New Testament books is peculiar in order and contents.
There seem to be no Catholic Epistles, and amongst the Pauline Epistles,
Galatians stands first; note also the curious order Hebrews, Colossians,
Ephesians, Philippians.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I do not think there can be the slightest doubt that our explanation
of the origin of the ῥήματα is correct.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='384'/><anchor id='Pg384'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Appendix E. Table Of Differences Between The Fourth Edition
Of Dr. Scrivener's Plain Introduction And
Dr. Gregory's Prolegomena.</head>


<p>
I. <hi rend='italic'>Evangelia.</hi>
</p>

<table rend='latexcolumns: "p{0.3cm} p{0.3cm}"; tblcolumns: "r r"'>
<row><cell>Greg.</cell><cell>Scriv.</cell></row>
<row><cell>450</cell><cell>Scholz</cell></row><row><cell>490</cell><cell>574</cell></row><row><cell>519</cell><cell>505</cell></row><row><cell>548</cell><cell>535</cell></row><row><cell>577</cell><cell>871</cell></row>
<row><cell>451</cell><cell>481</cell></row><row><cell>491</cell><cell>576</cell></row><row><cell>520</cell><cell>506</cell></row><row><cell>549</cell><cell>536</cell></row><row><cell>578</cell><cell>872</cell></row>
<row><cell>452</cell><cell>Scholz</cell></row><row><cell>492</cell><cell>577</cell></row><row><cell>521</cell><cell>562</cell></row><row><cell>550</cell><cell>537</cell></row><row><cell>579</cell><cell>743</cell></row>
<row><cell>453</cell><cell>Scholz</cell></row><row><cell>493</cell><cell>578</cell></row><row><cell>522</cell><cell>488</cell></row><row><cell>551</cell><cell>538</cell></row><row><cell>580</cell><cell>744</cell></row>
<row><cell>...</cell><cell>Scholz</cell></row><row><cell>494</cell><cell>325</cell></row><row><cell>523</cell><cell>489</cell></row><row><cell>552</cell><cell>539</cell></row><row><cell>581</cell><cell>450</cell></row>
<row><cell>466</cell><cell>Scholz</cell></row><row><cell>495</cell><cell>581</cell></row><row><cell>524</cell><cell>490</cell></row><row><cell>553</cell><cell>540</cell></row><row><cell>582</cell><cell>451</cell></row>
<row><cell>467</cell><cell>717</cell></row><row><cell>496</cell><cell>582</cell></row><row><cell>525</cell><cell>491</cell></row><row><cell>554</cell><cell>541</cell></row><row><cell>583</cell><cell>452</cell></row>
<row><cell>468</cell><cell>718</cell></row><row><cell>497</cell><cell>583</cell></row><row><cell>526</cell><cell>610</cell></row><row><cell>555</cell><cell>609</cell></row><row><cell>584</cell><cell>453</cell></row>
<row><cell>469</cell><cell>719</cell></row><row><cell>498</cell><cell>584</cell></row><row><cell>527</cell><cell>482</cell></row><row><cell>556</cell><cell>526</cell></row><row><cell>585</cell><cell>454</cell></row>
<row><cell>470</cell><cell>509</cell></row><row><cell>499</cell><cell>586</cell></row><row><cell>528</cell><cell>483</cell></row><row><cell>557</cell><cell>524</cell></row><row><cell>586</cell><cell>455</cell></row>
<row><cell>471</cell><cell>510</cell></row><row><cell>500</cell><cell>587</cell></row><row><cell>529</cell><cell>484</cell></row><row><cell>558</cell><cell>525</cell></row><row><cell>587</cell><cell>456</cell></row>
<row><cell>472</cell><cell>511</cell></row><row><cell>501</cell><cell>588</cell></row><row><cell>530</cell><cell>485</cell></row><row><cell>559</cell><cell>518</cell></row><row><cell>588</cell><cell>457</cell></row>
<row><cell>473</cell><cell>512</cell></row><row><cell>502</cell><cell>589</cell></row><row><cell>531</cell><cell>327</cell></row><row><cell>560</cell><cell>520</cell></row><row><cell>589</cell><cell>830</cell></row>
<row><cell>474</cell><cell>513</cell></row><row><cell>503</cell><cell>590</cell></row><row><cell>532</cell><cell>545</cell></row><row><cell>561</cell><cell>521</cell></row><row><cell>590</cell><cell>831</cell></row>
<row><cell>475</cell><cell>515</cell></row><row><cell>504</cell><cell>585</cell></row><row><cell>533</cell><cell>546</cell></row><row><cell>562</cell><cell>522</cell></row><row><cell>591</cell><cell>883</cell></row>
<row><cell>476</cell><cell>566</cell></row><row><cell>505</cell><cell>567</cell></row><row><cell>534</cell><cell>547</cell></row><row><cell>563</cell><cell>519</cell></row><row><cell>592</cell><cell>461</cell></row>
<row><cell>477</cell><cell>508</cell></row><row><cell>506</cell><cell>492</cell></row><row><cell>535</cell><cell>548</cell></row><row><cell>564</cell><cell>478</cell></row><row><cell>593</cell><cell>462</cell></row>
<row><cell>478</cell><cell>575</cell></row><row><cell>507</cell><cell>493</cell></row><row><cell>536</cell><cell>549</cell></row><row><cell>565</cell><cell>473</cell></row><row><cell>594</cell><cell>470</cell></row>
<row><cell>479</cell><cell>542</cell></row><row><cell>508</cell><cell>494</cell></row><row><cell>537</cell><cell>550</cell></row><row><cell>566</cell><cell>479</cell></row><row><cell>595</cell><cell>468</cell></row>
<row><cell>480</cell><cell>568</cell></row><row><cell>509</cell><cell>495</cell></row><row><cell>538</cell><cell>552</cell></row><row><cell>567</cell><cell>878</cell></row><row><cell>596</cell><cell>465</cell></row>
<row><cell>481</cell><cell>569</cell></row><row><cell>510</cell><cell>496</cell></row><row><cell>539</cell><cell>551</cell></row><row><cell>568</cell><cell>879</cell></row><row><cell>597</cell><cell>464</cell></row>
<row><cell>482</cell><cell>570</cell></row><row><cell>511</cell><cell>497</cell></row><row><cell>540</cell><cell>553</cell></row><row><cell>569</cell><cell>475</cell></row><row><cell>598</cell><cell>466</cell></row>
<row><cell>483</cell><cell>543</cell></row><row><cell>512</cell><cell>498</cell></row><row><cell>541</cell><cell>554</cell></row><row><cell>570</cell><cell>479</cell></row><row><cell>599</cell><cell>467</cell></row>
<row><cell>484</cell><cell>571</cell></row><row><cell>513</cell><cell>499</cell></row><row><cell>542</cell><cell>555</cell></row><row><cell>571</cell><cell>474</cell></row><row><cell>600</cell><cell>463</cell></row>
<row><cell>485</cell><cell>572</cell></row><row><cell>514</cell><cell>500</cell></row><row><cell>543</cell><cell>556</cell></row><row><cell>572</cell><cell>480</cell></row><row><cell>601</cell><cell>643</cell></row>
<row><cell>486</cell><cell>517</cell></row><row><cell>515</cell><cell>501</cell></row><row><cell>544</cell><cell>557</cell></row><row><cell>573</cell><cell>328</cell></row><row><cell>602</cell><cell>644</cell></row>
<row><cell>487</cell><cell>516</cell></row><row><cell>516</cell><cell>502</cell></row><row><cell>545</cell><cell>558</cell></row><row><cell>574</cell><cell>880</cell></row><row><cell>603</cell><cell>645</cell></row>
<row><cell>488</cell><cell>514</cell></row><row><cell>517</cell><cell>503</cell></row><row><cell>546</cell><cell>559</cell></row><row><cell>575</cell><cell>477</cell></row><row><cell>604</cell><cell>646</cell></row>
<row><cell>489</cell><cell>507</cell></row><row><cell>518</cell><cell>504</cell></row><row><cell>547</cell><cell>534</cell></row><row><cell>576</cell><cell>580</cell></row><row><cell>605</cell><cell>647</cell></row>
<pb n='385'/><anchor id='Pg385'/>
<row><cell>606</cell><cell>648</cell></row><row><cell>655</cell><cell>635</cell></row><row><cell>704</cell><cell>886</cell></row><row><cell>753</cell><cell>760</cell></row><row><cell>859</cell><cell>672</cell></row>
<row><cell>607</cell><cell>649</cell></row><row><cell>656</cell><cell>642</cell></row><row><cell>705</cell><cell>887</cell></row><row><cell>754</cell><cell>763</cell></row>
<row><cell>608</cell><cell>650</cell></row><row><cell>657</cell><cell>876</cell></row><row><cell>706</cell><cell>486</cell></row><row><cell>755</cell><cell>771</cell></row><row><cell>861</cell><cell>674</cell></row>
<row><cell>609</cell><cell>634</cell></row><row><cell>658</cell><cell>636</cell></row><row><cell>707</cell><cell>606</cell></row><row><cell>756</cell><cell>772</cell></row><row><cell>862</cell><cell>675</cell></row>
<row><cell>610</cell><cell>652</cell></row><row><cell>659</cell><cell>637</cell></row><row><cell>708</cell><cell>607</cell></row><row><cell>757</cell><cell>846</cell></row><row><cell>863</cell><cell>676</cell></row>
<row><cell>611</cell><cell>653</cell></row><row><cell>660</cell><cell>638</cell></row><row><cell>709</cell><cell>737</cell></row><row><cell>758</cell><cell>847</cell></row>
<row><cell>612</cell><cell>654</cell></row><row><cell>661</cell><cell>639</cell></row><row><cell>710</cell><cell>81</cell></row><row><cell>759</cell><cell>848</cell></row><row><cell>867</cell><cell>680</cell></row>
<row><cell>613</cell><cell>655</cell></row><row><cell>662</cell><cell>632</cell></row><row><cell>711</cell><cell>617</cell></row><row><cell>760</cell><cell>849</cell></row><row><cell>868</cell><cell>683</cell></row>
<row><cell>614</cell><cell>656</cell></row><row><cell>663</cell><cell>877</cell></row><row><cell>712</cell><cell>560</cell></row><row><cell>761</cell><cell>850</cell></row><row><cell>869</cell><cell>684</cell></row>
<row><cell>615</cell><cell>657</cell></row><row><cell>664</cell><cell>605</cell></row><row><cell>713</cell><cell>561</cell></row><row><cell>762</cell><cell>851</cell></row><row><cell>870</cell></row>
<row><cell>616</cell><cell>658</cell></row><row><cell>665</cell><cell>895</cell></row><row><cell>714</cell><cell>563</cell></row><row><cell>763</cell><cell>854</cell></row><row><cell>871</cell><cell>687</cell></row>
<row><cell>617</cell><cell>659</cell></row><row><cell>666</cell><cell>899</cell></row><row><cell>715</cell><cell>564</cell></row><row><cell>764</cell><cell>855</cell></row><row><cell>872</cell><cell>690</cell></row>
<row><cell>618</cell><cell>660</cell></row><row><cell>667</cell><cell>900</cell></row><row><cell>716</cell><cell>565</cell></row><row><cell>765</cell><cell>856</cell></row><row><cell>873</cell><cell>689</cell></row>
<row><cell>619</cell><cell>661</cell></row><row><cell>668</cell><cell>1144</cell></row><row><cell>717</cell><cell>606</cell></row><row><cell>766</cell><cell>857</cell></row><row><cell>874</cell><cell>691</cell></row>
<row><cell>620</cell><cell>662</cell></row><row><cell>669</cell><cell>902</cell></row><row><cell>718</cell><cell>736</cell></row><row><cell>767</cell><cell>858</cell></row><row><cell>875</cell><cell>692</cell></row>
<row><cell>621</cell><cell>663</cell></row><row><cell>670</cell><cell>901</cell></row><row><cell>719</cell><cell>824</cell></row><row><cell>768</cell><cell>859</cell></row><row><cell>876</cell><cell>693</cell></row>
<row><cell>622</cell><cell>664</cell></row><row><cell>671</cell><cell>544</cell></row><row><cell>720</cell><cell>825</cell></row><row><cell>769</cell><cell>861</cell></row><row><cell>877</cell><cell>694</cell></row>
<row><cell>623</cell><cell>665</cell></row><row><cell>672</cell><cell>618</cell></row><row><cell>721</cell><cell>826</cell></row><row><cell>770</cell><cell>862</cell></row><row><cell>878</cell><cell>703</cell></row>
<row><cell>624</cell><cell>667</cell></row><row><cell>673</cell><cell>619</cell></row><row><cell>722</cell><cell>827</cell></row><row><cell>771</cell><cell>863</cell></row><row><cell>879</cell><cell>704</cell></row>
<row><cell>625</cell><cell>673</cell></row><row><cell>674</cell><cell>620</cell></row><row><cell>723</cell><cell>828</cell></row><row><cell>772</cell><cell>867</cell></row><row><cell>880</cell><cell>705</cell></row>
<row><cell>626</cell><cell>674</cell></row><row><cell>675</cell><cell>621</cell></row><row><cell>724</cell><cell>829</cell></row><row><cell>773</cell><cell>868</cell></row><row><cell>881</cell><cell>708</cell></row>
<row><cell>627</cell><cell>678</cell></row><row><cell>676</cell><cell>527</cell></row><row><cell>725</cell><cell>881</cell></row><row><cell>774</cell><cell>869</cell></row><row><cell>882</cell><cell>713</cell></row>
<row><cell>628</cell><cell>679</cell></row><row><cell>677</cell><cell>528</cell></row><row><cell>726</cell><cell>882</cell></row><row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>  </cell></row><row><cell>883</cell><cell>714</cell></row>
<row><cell>629</cell><cell>681</cell></row><row><cell>678</cell><cell>529</cell></row><row><cell>727</cell><cell>745</cell></row><row><cell>824</cell><cell>622</cell></row><row><cell>884</cell><cell>696</cell></row>
<row><cell>630</cell><cell>682</cell></row><row><cell>679</cell><cell>530</cell></row><row><cell>728</cell><cell>746</cell></row><row><cell>825</cell><cell>623</cell></row><row><cell>885</cell><cell>697</cell></row>
<row><cell>631</cell><cell>685</cell></row><row><cell>680</cell><cell>531</cell></row><row><cell>729</cell><cell>747</cell></row><row><cell>826</cell><cell>624</cell></row><row><cell>886</cell><cell>698</cell></row>
<row><cell>632</cell><cell>686</cell></row><row><cell>681</cell><cell>532</cell></row><row><cell>730</cell><cell>748</cell></row><row><cell>827</cell><cell>625</cell></row><row><cell>887</cell><cell>699</cell></row>
<row><cell>633</cell><cell>688</cell></row><row><cell>682</cell><cell>533</cell></row><row><cell>731</cell><cell>749</cell></row><row><cell>828</cell><cell>626</cell></row>
<row><cell>634</cell><cell>695</cell></row><row><cell>683</cell><cell>1145</cell></row><row><cell>732</cell><cell>750</cell></row><row><cell>829</cell><cell>627</cell></row><row><cell>899</cell><cell>613</cell></row>
<row><cell>635</cell><cell>700</cell></row><row><cell>684</cell><cell>1146</cell></row><row><cell>733</cell><cell>751</cell></row><row><cell>830</cell><cell>628</cell></row><row><cell>900</cell><cell>614</cell></row>
<row><cell>636</cell><cell>701</cell></row><row><cell>685</cell><cell>1147</cell></row><row><cell>734</cell><cell>752</cell></row><row><cell>831</cell><cell>629</cell></row><row><cell>901</cell><cell>615</cell></row>
<row><cell>637</cell><cell>702</cell></row><row><cell>686</cell><cell>573</cell></row><row><cell>735</cell><cell>753</cell></row><row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>  </cell></row><row><cell>902</cell><cell>616</cell></row>
<row><cell>638</cell><cell>706</cell></row><row><cell>687</cell><cell>579</cell></row><row><cell>736</cell><cell>754</cell></row>
<row><cell>639</cell><cell>710</cell></row><row><cell>688</cell><cell>592</cell></row><row><cell>737</cell><cell>755</cell></row><row><cell>839</cell><cell>630</cell></row>
<row><cell>640</cell><cell>711</cell></row><row><cell>689</cell><cell>593</cell></row><row><cell>738</cell><cell>756</cell></row><row><cell>840</cell><cell>631</cell></row><row><cell>1144</cell><cell>727</cell></row>
<row><cell>641</cell><cell>712</cell></row><row><cell>690</cell><cell>594</cell></row><row><cell>739</cell><cell>757</cell></row><row><cell>1145</cell><cell>728</cell></row>
<row><cell>642</cell><cell>715</cell></row><row><cell>691</cell><cell>595</cell></row><row><cell>740</cell><cell>761</cell></row><row><cell>1146</cell><cell>731</cell></row>
<row><cell>643</cell><cell>716</cell></row><row><cell>692</cell><cell>596</cell></row><row><cell>741</cell><cell>762</cell></row><row><cell>847</cell><cell>723</cell></row><row><cell>1147</cell><cell>733</cell></row>
<row><cell>644</cell><cell>720</cell></row><row><cell>693</cell><cell>597</cell></row><row><cell>742</cell><cell>764</cell></row><row><cell>848</cell><cell>611</cell></row><row><cell>1148</cell><cell>734</cell></row>
<row><cell>645</cell><cell>591</cell></row><row><cell>694</cell><cell>598</cell></row><row><cell>743</cell><cell>738</cell></row><row><cell>849</cell><cell>730</cell></row><row><cell>1149</cell><cell>735</cell></row>
<row><cell>646</cell><cell>721</cell></row><row><cell>695</cell><cell>599</cell></row><row><cell>744</cell><cell>759</cell></row><row><cell>850</cell><cell>729</cell></row>
<row><cell>647</cell><cell>722</cell></row><row><cell>696</cell><cell>600</cell></row><row><cell>745</cell><cell>633</cell></row>
<row><cell>648</cell><cell>724</cell></row><row><cell>697</cell><cell>601</cell></row><row><cell>746</cell><cell>740</cell></row><row><cell>852</cell><cell>732</cell></row><row><cell>1262</cell><cell>766</cell></row>
<row><cell>649</cell><cell>725</cell></row><row><cell>698</cell><cell>602</cell></row><row><cell>747</cell><cell>741</cell></row><row><cell></cell><cell></cell><cell>  </cell></row><row><cell>1263</cell><cell>767</cell></row>
<row><cell>650</cell><cell>726</cell></row><row><cell>699</cell><cell>603</cell></row><row><cell>748</cell><cell>758</cell></row><row><cell>854</cell><cell>666</cell></row>
<row><cell>651</cell><cell>874</cell></row><row><cell>700</cell><cell>604</cell></row><row><cell>749</cell><cell>773</cell></row><row><cell>855</cell><cell>668</cell></row><row><cell>1265</cell><cell>768</cell></row>
<row><cell>652</cell><cell>875</cell></row><row><cell>701</cell><cell>523</cell></row><row><cell>750</cell><cell>742</cell></row><row><cell>856</cell><cell>669</cell></row><row><cell>1266</cell><cell>769</cell></row>
<row><cell>653</cell><cell>640</cell></row><row><cell>702</cell><cell>884</cell></row><row><cell>751</cell><cell>739</cell></row><row><cell>857</cell><cell>670</cell></row><row><cell>1267</cell><cell>770</cell></row>
<row><cell>654</cell><cell>641</cell></row><row><cell>703</cell><cell>885</cell></row><row><cell>752</cell><cell>774</cell></row><row><cell>858</cell><cell>671</cell></row><row><cell>1268</cell><cell>110</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='386'/><anchor id='Pg386'/>

<p>
II. <hi rend='italic'>Acts and Catholic Epistles.</hi>
</p>

<table rend='latexcolumns: "p{0.3cm} p{0.3cm}"; tblcolumns: "r r"'>
<row><cell>Greg.</cell><cell>Scriv.</cell></row>
<row><cell>182</cell><cell>Scholz</cell></row><row><cell>204</cell><cell>107</cell></row><row><cell>226</cell><cell>216</cell></row><row><cell>248</cell><cell>251</cell></row><row><cell>301</cell><cell>240</cell></row>
<row><cell>183</cell><cell>257</cell></row><row><cell>205</cell><cell>232</cell></row><row><cell>227</cell><cell>217</cell></row><row><cell>249</cell><cell>263</cell></row><row><cell>302</cell><cell>250</cell></row>
<row><cell>184</cell><cell>258</cell></row><row><cell>206</cell><cell>194</cell></row><row><cell>228</cell><cell>218</cell></row><row><cell>250</cell><cell>264</cell></row><row><cell>303</cell><cell>248</cell></row>
<row><cell>185</cell><cell>Scholz</cell></row><row><cell>207</cell><cell>197</cell></row><row><cell>229</cell><cell>223</cell></row><row><cell>251</cell><cell>201</cell></row>
<row><cell>186</cell><cell>Scholz</cell></row><row><cell>208</cell><cell>259</cell></row><row><cell>230</cell><cell>202</cell></row><row><cell>252</cell><cell>249</cell></row><row><cell>317</cell><cell>243</cell></row>
<row><cell>187</cell><cell>Scholz</cell></row><row><cell>209</cell><cell>260</cell></row><row><cell>231</cell><cell>203</cell></row><row><cell>253</cell><cell>233</cell></row><row><cell>318</cell><cell>244</cell></row>
<row><cell>188</cell><cell>Scholz</cell></row><row><cell>210</cell><cell>328</cell></row><row><cell>232</cell><cell>204</cell></row><row><cell>254</cell><cell>200</cell></row><row><cell>319</cell><cell>245</cell></row>
<row><cell>189</cell><cell>Scholz</cell></row><row><cell>211</cell><cell>317</cell></row><row><cell>233</cell><cell>205</cell></row><row><cell>255</cell><cell>199</cell></row><row><cell>320</cell><cell>241</cell></row>
<row><cell>190</cell><cell>Scholz</cell></row><row><cell>212</cell><cell>318</cell></row><row><cell>234</cell><cell>206</cell></row><row><cell>256</cell><cell>231</cell></row><row><cell>321</cell><cell>261</cell></row>
<row><cell>191</cell><cell>Scholz</cell></row><row><cell>213</cell><cell>252</cell></row><row><cell>235</cell><cell>207</cell></row><row><cell>257</cell><cell>222</cell></row>
<row><cell>192</cell><cell>Scholz</cell></row><row><cell>214</cell><cell>182</cell></row><row><cell>236</cell><cell>208</cell></row><row><cell>258</cell><cell>289</cell></row><row><cell>325</cell><cell>239</cell></row>
<row><cell>193</cell><cell>188</cell></row><row><cell>215</cell><cell>183</cell></row><row><cell>237</cell><cell>209</cell></row><row><cell>259</cell><cell>260</cell></row><row><cell>326</cell><cell>246</cell></row>
<row><cell>194</cell><cell>187</cell></row><row><cell>216</cell><cell>184</cell></row><row><cell>238</cell><cell>195</cell></row><row><cell>260</cell><cell>209</cell></row>
<row><cell>195</cell><cell>224</cell></row><row><cell>217</cell><cell>185</cell></row><row><cell>239</cell><cell>196</cell></row><row><cell>261</cell><cell>267</cell></row><row><cell>328</cell><cell>319</cell></row>
<row><cell>196</cell><cell>226</cell></row><row><cell>218</cell><cell>186</cell></row><row><cell>240</cell><cell>253</cell></row><row><cell>262</cell><cell>269</cell></row><row><cell>329</cell><cell>256</cell></row>
<row><cell>197</cell><cell>227</cell></row><row><cell>219</cell><cell>225</cell></row><row><cell>241</cell><cell>254</cell></row><row><cell>263</cell><cell>321</cell></row><row><cell>330</cell><cell>247</cell></row>
<row><cell>198</cell><cell>228</cell></row><row><cell>220</cell><cell>229</cell></row><row><cell>242</cell><cell>255</cell></row><row><cell>264</cell><cell>326</cell></row><row><cell>334</cell><cell>238</cell></row>
<row><cell>199</cell><cell>193</cell></row><row><cell>221</cell><cell>212</cell></row><row><cell>243</cell><cell>301</cell></row><row><cell>335</cell><cell>236</cell></row>
<row><cell>200</cell><cell>211</cell></row><row><cell>222</cell><cell>213</cell></row><row><cell>244</cell><cell>302</cell></row><row><cell>267</cell><cell>242</cell></row>
<row><cell>201</cell><cell>219</cell></row><row><cell>223</cell><cell>220</cell></row><row><cell>245</cell><cell>335</cell></row><row><cell>268</cell><cell>334</cell></row><row><cell>415</cell><cell>210</cell></row>
<row><cell>202</cell><cell>215</cell></row><row><cell>224</cell><cell>221</cell></row><row><cell>246</cell><cell>415</cell></row><row><cell>269</cell><cell>237</cell></row><row><cell>416</cell><cell>147</cell></row>
<row><cell>203</cell><cell>230</cell></row><row><cell>225</cell><cell>198</cell></row><row><cell>247</cell><cell>110</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
III.      <hi rend='italic'>Paul</hi>
</p>

<table rend='latexcolumns: "p{0.3cm} p{0.3cm}"; tblcolumns: "r r"'>
<row><cell>Greg.</cell><cell>Scriv.</cell></row>
<row><cell>131</cell><cell>261</cell></row><row><cell>248</cell><cell>262</cell></row><row><cell>266</cell><cell>230</cell></row><row><cell>284</cell><cell>248</cell></row><row><cell>302</cell><cell>299</cell></row>
<row><cell>231</cell><cell>303?</cell></row><row><cell>249</cell><cell>258</cell></row><row><cell>267</cell><cell>316</cell></row><row><cell>285</cell><cell>275</cell></row><row><cell>303</cell><cell>243</cell></row>
<row><cell>232</cell><cell>306?</cell></row><row><cell>250</cell><cell>259</cell></row><row><cell>268</cell><cell>317</cell></row><row><cell>286</cell><cell>296</cell></row><row><cell>304</cell><cell>281</cell></row>
<row><cell>233</cell><cell>Scholz</cell></row><row><cell>251</cell><cell>257</cell></row><row><cell>269</cell><cell>302</cell></row><row><cell>287</cell><cell>334</cell></row><row><cell>305</cell><cell>231</cell></row>
<row><cell>234</cell><cell>Scholz</cell></row><row><cell>252</cell><cell>260</cell></row><row><cell>270</cell><cell>252</cell></row><row><cell>288</cell><cell>316</cell></row><row><cell>306</cell><cell>266</cell></row>
<row><cell>235</cell><cell>Scholz</cell></row><row><cell>253</cell><cell>268</cell></row><row><cell>271</cell><cell>253</cell></row><row><cell>289</cell><cell>329</cell></row><row><cell>307</cell><cell>278</cell></row>
<row><cell>236</cell><cell>Scholz</cell></row><row><cell>254</cell><cell>279</cell></row><row><cell>272</cell><cell>254</cell></row><row><cell>290</cell><cell>256</cell></row><row><cell>308</cell><cell>398</cell></row>
<row><cell>237</cell><cell>Scholz</cell></row><row><cell>255</cell><cell>269</cell></row><row><cell>273</cell><cell>255</cell></row><row><cell>291</cell><cell>267</cell></row><row><cell>309</cell><cell>399</cell></row>
<row><cell>238</cell><cell>Scholz</cell></row><row><cell>256</cell><cell>277</cell></row><row><cell>274</cell><cell>321</cell></row><row><cell>292</cell><cell>331</cell></row><row><cell>310</cell><cell>400</cell></row>
<row><cell>239</cell><cell>Scholz</cell></row><row><cell>257</cell><cell>249</cell></row><row><cell>275</cell><cell>270</cell></row><row><cell>293</cell><cell>263</cell></row><row><cell>311</cell><cell>401</cell></row>
<row><cell>240</cell><cell>240</cell></row><row><cell>258</cell><cell>233</cell></row><row><cell>276</cell><cell>250</cell></row><row><cell>294</cell><cell>226</cell></row><row><cell>312</cell><cell>276</cell></row>
<row><cell>241</cell><cell>Scholz</cell></row><row><cell>259</cell><cell>282</cell></row><row><cell>277</cell><cell>251</cell></row><row><cell>295</cell><cell>332</cell></row><row><cell>313</cell><cell>402</cell></row>
<row><cell>242</cell><cell>242</cell></row><row><cell>260</cell><cell>300</cell></row><row><cell>278</cell><cell>264</cell></row><row><cell>296</cell><cell>333</cell></row><row><cell>314</cell><cell>403</cell></row>
<row><cell>243</cell><cell>Scholz</cell></row><row><cell>261</cell><cell>298</cell></row><row><cell>279</cell><cell>265</cell></row><row><cell>297</cell><cell>335</cell></row><row><cell>315</cell><cell>404</cell></row>
<row><cell>244</cell><cell>244</cell></row><row><cell>262</cell><cell>222</cell></row><row><cell>280</cell><cell>280</cell></row><row><cell>298</cell><cell>301</cell></row><row><cell>316</cell><cell>290</cell></row>
<row><cell>245</cell><cell>245</cell></row><row><cell>263</cell><cell>223</cell></row><row><cell>281</cell><cell>234</cell></row><row><cell>299</cell><cell>337</cell></row><row><cell>317</cell><cell>325</cell></row>
<row><cell>246</cell><cell>246</cell></row><row><cell>264</cell><cell>152</cell></row><row><cell>282</cell><cell>235</cell></row><row><cell>300</cell><cell>237</cell></row><row><cell>318</cell><cell>406</cell></row>
<row><cell>247</cell><cell>247</cell></row><row><cell>265</cell><cell>304</cell></row><row><cell>283</cell><cell>236</cell></row><row><cell>301</cell><cell>396</cell></row><row><cell>319</cell><cell>274</cell></row>
<pb n='387'/><anchor id='Pg387'/>
<row><cell>320</cell><cell>407</cell></row><row><cell>333</cell><cell>476</cell></row><row><cell>376<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi></cell><cell>330</cell></row><row><cell>401</cell><cell>312</cell></row><row><cell>426</cell><cell>283</cell></row>
<row><cell>321</cell><cell>423</cell></row><row><cell>334</cell><cell>478</cell></row><row><cell>377</cell><cell>341</cell></row><row><cell>402</cell><cell>314</cell></row><row><cell>427</cell><cell>336</cell></row>
<row><cell>322</cell><cell>424</cell></row><row><cell>335</cell><cell>480</cell></row><row><cell>403</cell><cell>315</cell></row><row><cell>430</cell><cell>294</cell></row>
<row><cell>323</cell><cell>435</cell></row><row><cell>336</cell><cell>53</cell></row><row><cell>404</cell><cell>323</cell></row><row><cell>431</cell><cell>319</cell></row>
<row><cell>324</cell><cell>426</cell></row><row><cell>337</cell><cell>481</cell></row><row><cell>380</cell><cell>339</cell></row><row><cell>432</cell><cell>322</cell></row>
<row><cell>325</cell><cell>427</cell></row><row><cell>338</cell><cell>482</cell></row><row><cell>381</cell><cell>340</cell></row><row><cell>433</cell><cell>295</cell></row>
<row><cell>326</cell><cell>430</cell></row><row><cell>339</cell><cell>487</cell></row><row><cell>392</cell><cell>288</cell></row><row><cell>406</cell><cell>327</cell></row><row><cell>436</cell><cell>272</cell></row>
<row><cell>327</cell><cell>431</cell></row><row><cell>340</cell><cell>484</cell></row><row><cell>393</cell><cell>286</cell></row><row><cell>407</cell><cell>328</cell></row><row><cell>437</cell><cell>273</cell></row>
<row><cell>328</cell><cell>432</cell></row><row><cell>341</cell><cell>485</cell></row><row><cell>393<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi></cell><cell>287</cell></row><row><cell>472</cell><cell>232</cell></row>
<row><cell>329</cell><cell>433</cell></row><row><cell>396</cell><cell>297</cell></row><row><cell>476</cell><cell>285</cell></row>
<row><cell>330</cell><cell>436</cell></row><row><cell>398</cell><cell>305</cell></row><row><cell>423</cell><cell>291</cell></row><row><cell>476<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi></cell><cell>326</cell></row>
<row><cell>331</cell><cell>437</cell></row><row><cell>376</cell><cell>338</cell></row><row><cell>399</cell><cell>310</cell></row><row><cell>424</cell><cell>292</cell></row><row><cell>478</cell><cell>225</cell></row>
<row><cell>332</cell><cell>472</cell></row><row><cell>376<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>c</hi></cell><cell>377</cell></row><row><cell>400</cell><cell>311</cell></row><row><cell>425</cell><cell>293</cell></row><row><cell>480</cell><cell>324</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
IV.     <hi rend='italic'>Apocalypse.</hi>
</p>

<table rend='latexcolumns: "p{0.3cm} p{0.3cm}"; tblcolumns: "r r"'>
<row><cell>Greg.</cell><cell>Scriv.</cell></row>
<row><cell>101</cell><cell>103</cell></row><row><cell>109</cell><cell>101</cell></row><row><cell>117</cell><cell>157</cell></row><row><cell>158</cell></row>
<row><cell>102</cell><cell>109</cell></row><row><cell>110</cell><cell>146</cell></row><row><cell>118</cell><cell>160</cell></row><row><cell>149</cell><cell>120</cell></row><row><cell>159</cell></row>
<row><cell>103</cell><cell>102</cell></row><row><cell>111</cell><cell>149</cell></row><row><cell>119</cell><cell>161</cell></row><row><cell>150</cell><cell>121</cell></row><row><cell>160</cell><cell>118</cell></row>
<row><cell>104</cell><cell>105</cell></row><row><cell>112</cell><cell>150</cell></row><row><cell>120</cell><cell>182</cell></row><row><cell>151</cell><cell>122</cell></row><row><cell>161</cell><cell>119</cell></row>
<row><cell>105</cell><cell>111</cell></row><row><cell>113</cell><cell>110</cell></row><row><cell>121</cell><cell>153</cell></row>
<row><cell>114</cell><cell>115</cell></row><row><cell>122</cell><cell>86</cell></row><row><cell>153</cell><cell>114</cell></row><row><cell>181</cell><cell>107</cell></row>
<row><cell>107</cell><cell>104</cell></row><row><cell>115</cell><cell>117</cell></row><row><cell>182</cell><cell>112</cell></row>
<row><cell>108</cell><cell>89</cell></row><row><cell>116</cell><cell>151</cell></row><row><cell>146</cell><cell>113</cell></row><row><cell>157</cell><cell>116</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
V.      <hi rend='italic'>Evangelistaries</hi>
</p>

<table rend='latexcolumns: "p{0.3cm} p{0.3cm}"; tblcolumns: "r r"'>
<row><cell>Greg.</cell><cell>Scriv.</cell></row>
<row><cell>155</cell><cell>180</cell></row><row><cell>174</cell><cell></cell></row><row><cell>191</cell><cell>263</cell></row><row><cell>208</cell><cell>215</cell></row><row><cell>225</cell><cell>248</cell></row>
<row><cell>158</cell><cell></cell></row><row><cell>175</cell><cell></cell></row><row><cell>192</cell><cell>264</cell></row><row><cell>209</cell><cell>216</cell></row><row><cell>226</cell><cell>249</cell></row>
<row><cell>159</cell><cell></cell></row><row><cell>176</cell><cell></cell></row><row><cell>193</cell><cell>266</cell></row><row><cell>210</cell><cell>217</cell></row><row><cell>227</cell><cell>250</cell></row>
<row><cell>160</cell><cell></cell></row><row><cell>177</cell><cell></cell></row><row><cell>194</cell><cell>202</cell></row><row><cell>211</cell><cell>218</cell></row><row><cell>228</cell><cell>253<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi></cell></row>
<row><cell>161</cell><cell></cell></row><row><cell>178</cell><cell></cell></row><row><cell>195</cell><cell>203</cell></row><row><cell>212</cell><cell>219</cell></row><row><cell>229</cell><cell>223</cell></row>
<row><cell>162</cell><cell></cell></row><row><cell>179</cell><cell>179</cell></row><row><cell>196</cell><cell>204</cell></row><row><cell>213</cell><cell>220</cell></row><row><cell>230</cell><cell>224</cell></row>
<row><cell>163</cell><cell></cell></row><row><cell>180</cell><cell>463</cell></row><row><cell>197</cell><cell>205</cell></row><row><cell>214</cell><cell>239</cell></row><row><cell>231</cell><cell>225</cell></row>
<row><cell>164</cell><cell></cell></row><row><cell>181</cell><cell>234</cell></row><row><cell>198</cell><cell>206</cell></row><row><cell>215</cell><cell>240</cell></row><row><cell>232</cell><cell>226</cell></row>
<row><cell>165</cell><cell></cell></row><row><cell>182</cell><cell>233</cell></row><row><cell>199</cell><cell>207</cell></row><row><cell>216</cell><cell>251</cell></row><row><cell>233</cell><cell>235</cell></row>
<row><cell>166</cell><cell></cell></row><row><cell>183</cell><cell>257</cell></row><row><cell>200</cell><cell>208</cell></row><row><cell>217</cell><cell>241</cell></row><row><cell>234</cell><cell>227</cell></row>
<row><cell>167</cell><cell></cell></row><row><cell>184</cell><cell>259</cell></row><row><cell>201</cell><cell>209</cell></row><row><cell>218</cell><cell>242</cell></row><row><cell>235</cell><cell>228</cell></row>
<row><cell>168</cell><cell></cell></row><row><cell>185</cell><cell>222</cell></row><row><cell>202</cell><cell>210</cell></row><row><cell>219</cell><cell>243</cell></row><row><cell>236</cell><cell>229</cell></row>
<row><cell>169</cell><cell></cell></row><row><cell>186</cell><cell>221</cell></row><row><cell>203</cell><cell>211</cell></row><row><cell>220</cell><cell>244</cell></row><row><cell>237</cell><cell>237</cell></row>
<row><cell>170</cell><cell>326</cell></row><row><cell>187</cell><cell>256</cell></row><row><cell>204</cell><cell>212</cell></row><row><cell>221</cell><cell>245</cell></row><row><cell>237<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi></cell><cell>238</cell></row>
<row><cell>171</cell><cell></cell></row><row><cell>188</cell><cell>260</cell></row><row><cell>205</cell><cell>201</cell></row><row><cell>222</cell><cell>246</cell></row><row><cell>238</cell><cell>254</cell></row>
<row><cell>172</cell><cell></cell></row><row><cell>189</cell><cell>261</cell></row><row><cell>206</cell><cell>213</cell></row><row><cell>223</cell><cell>252</cell></row><row><cell>239</cell><cell>230</cell></row>
<row><cell>173</cell><cell></cell></row><row><cell>190</cell><cell>262</cell></row><row><cell>207</cell><cell>214</cell></row><row><cell>224</cell><cell>247</cell></row><row><cell>240</cell><cell>231</cell></row>
<pb n='388'/><anchor id='Pg388'/>
<row><cell>241</cell><cell>232</cell></row><row><cell>289</cell><cell>168</cell></row><row><cell>336</cell><cell>284</cell></row><row><cell>385</cell><cell>520</cell></row><row><cell>467</cell><cell>317</cell></row>
<row><cell>242</cell><cell>465</cell></row><row><cell>290</cell><cell>169</cell></row><row><cell>337</cell><cell>285</cell></row><row><cell>386</cell><cell>521</cell></row><row><cell>468</cell><cell>318</cell></row>
<row><cell>243</cell><cell>466</cell></row><row><cell>291</cell><cell>187</cell></row><row><cell>338</cell><cell>499</cell></row><row><cell>387</cell><cell>522</cell></row><row><cell>469</cell><cell>319</cell></row>
<row><cell>244</cell><cell>467</cell></row><row><cell>292</cell><cell>189</cell></row><row><cell>339</cell><cell>59</cell></row><row><cell>388</cell><cell>523</cell></row><row><cell>470</cell><cell>320</cell></row>
<row><cell>245<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi></cell><cell>468</cell></row><row><cell>293</cell><cell>190</cell></row><row><cell>340</cell><cell>258</cell></row><row><cell>389</cell><cell>524</cell></row><row><cell>471</cell><cell>321</cell></row>
<row><cell>245<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi></cell><cell>469</cell></row><row><cell>294</cell><cell>481</cell></row><row><cell>341</cell><cell>288</cell></row><row><cell>390</cell><cell>528</cell></row><row><cell>472</cell><cell>330</cell></row>
<row><cell>246</cell><cell>194</cell></row><row><cell>295</cell><cell>482</cell></row><row><cell>342</cell><cell>289</cell></row><row><cell>391</cell><cell>529</cell></row><row><cell>472<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>c</hi></cell><cell>330</cell></row>
<row><cell>247</cell><cell>470</cell></row><row><cell>296</cell><cell>483</cell></row><row><cell>343</cell><cell>298</cell></row><row><cell>392</cell><cell>530</cell></row><row><cell>473</cell><cell>323</cell></row>
<row><cell>248</cell><cell>471</cell></row><row><cell>297</cell><cell>484</cell></row><row><cell>344</cell><cell>236</cell></row><row><cell>393</cell><cell>531</cell></row><row><cell>474</cell><cell>420</cell></row>
<row><cell>249</cell><cell>191</cell></row><row><cell>298</cell><cell>485</cell></row><row><cell>345</cell><cell>500</cell></row><row><cell>394</cell><cell>532</cell></row><row><cell>475</cell><cell>325</cell></row>
<row><cell>250</cell><cell>472</cell></row><row><cell>299</cell><cell>200</cell></row><row><cell>346</cell><cell>255</cell></row><row><cell>395</cell><cell>534</cell></row><row><cell>476</cell><cell>290</cell></row>
<row><cell>251</cell><cell>195</cell></row><row><cell>300</cell><cell>286</cell></row><row><cell>347</cell><cell>501</cell></row><row><cell>396</cell><cell>535</cell></row><row><cell>477</cell><cell>363</cell></row>
<row><cell>252</cell><cell>473</cell></row><row><cell>301</cell><cell>486</cell></row><row><cell>348</cell><cell>502</cell></row><row><cell>397</cell><cell>536</cell></row><row><cell>478</cell><cell>322</cell></row>
<row><cell>253</cell><cell>196</cell></row><row><cell>302<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi></cell><cell>487</cell></row><row><cell>349</cell><cell>503</cell></row><row><cell>398<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ab</hi></cell><cell>537</cell></row><row><cell>480</cell><cell>331</cell></row>
<row><cell>254</cell><cell>474</cell></row><row><cell>302<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi></cell><cell>489</cell></row><row><cell>350</cell><cell>504</cell></row><row><cell>399<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ab</hi></cell><cell>538</cell></row><row><cell>481</cell><cell>332</cell></row>
<row><cell>255</cell><cell>475</cell></row><row><cell>303</cell><cell>491</cell></row><row><cell>351</cell><cell>505</cell></row><row><cell>400</cell><cell>540</cell></row><row><cell>482</cell><cell>333</cell></row>
<row><cell>256</cell><cell>192</cell></row><row><cell>304</cell><cell>492</cell></row><row><cell>352</cell><cell>506</cell></row><row><cell>401</cell><cell>541</cell></row><row><cell>484</cell><cell>334</cell></row>
<row><cell>257</cell><cell>476</cell></row><row><cell>305</cell><cell>291</cell></row><row><cell>353</cell><cell>507</cell></row><row><cell>402</cell><cell>542</cell></row><row><cell>485</cell><cell>336</cell></row>
<row><cell>258</cell><cell>197</cell></row><row><cell>306</cell><cell>292</cell></row><row><cell>354</cell><cell>508</cell></row><row><cell>403</cell><cell>543</cell></row><row><cell>486<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi></cell><cell>337</cell></row>
<row><cell>259</cell><cell>477</cell></row><row><cell>307</cell><cell>293</cell></row><row><cell>355</cell><cell>509</cell></row><row><cell>404</cell><cell>544</cell></row><row><cell>486<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi></cell><cell>340</cell></row>
<row><cell>260</cell><cell>198</cell></row><row><cell>308</cell><cell>294</cell></row><row><cell>356</cell><cell>512</cell></row><row><cell>405</cell><cell>546</cell></row><row><cell>487</cell><cell>338</cell></row>
<row><cell>261</cell><cell>158</cell></row><row><cell>309</cell><cell>295</cell></row><row><cell>357</cell><cell>513</cell></row><row><cell>406</cell><cell>549</cell></row><row><cell>488</cell><cell>339</cell></row>
<row><cell>262</cell><cell>159</cell></row><row><cell>310</cell><cell>296</cell></row><row><cell>358</cell><cell>514</cell></row><row><cell>407</cell><cell>550</cell></row><row><cell>489</cell><cell>341</cell></row>
<row><cell>263</cell><cell>193</cell></row><row><cell>311</cell><cell>297</cell></row><row><cell>359</cell><cell>515</cell></row><row><cell>408</cell><cell>552</cell></row><row><cell>490</cell><cell>342</cell></row>
<row><cell>264</cell><cell>170</cell></row><row><cell>312</cell><cell>493</cell></row><row><cell>360</cell><cell>516</cell></row><row><cell>409</cell><cell>553</cell></row><row><cell>491</cell><cell>343</cell></row>
<row><cell>265</cell><cell>171</cell></row><row><cell>313</cell><cell>494</cell></row><row><cell>361</cell><cell>426</cell></row><row><cell>410</cell><cell>556</cell></row><row><cell>492</cell><cell>344</cell></row>
<row><cell>266</cell><cell>172</cell></row><row><cell>314</cell><cell>495</cell></row><row><cell>362</cell><cell>427</cell></row><row><cell>411</cell><cell>560</cell></row><row><cell>493</cell><cell>345</cell></row>
<row><cell>267</cell><cell>173</cell></row><row><cell>315</cell><cell>253</cell></row><row><cell>363</cell><cell>299</cell></row><row><cell>412</cell><cell>561</cell></row><row><cell>494</cell><cell>346</cell></row>
<row><cell>268</cell><cell>174</cell></row><row><cell>316</cell><cell>496</cell></row><row><cell>364</cell><cell>416</cell></row><row><cell>413</cell><cell>563</cell></row><row><cell>495</cell><cell>347</cell></row>
<row><cell>269</cell><cell>175</cell></row><row><cell>317</cell><cell>497</cell></row><row><cell>365</cell><cell>417</cell></row><row><cell>414</cell><cell>564</cell></row><row><cell>496</cell><cell>348</cell></row>
<row><cell>270</cell><cell>176</cell></row><row><cell>318</cell><cell>265</cell></row><row><cell>366</cell><cell>366</cell></row><row><cell>415</cell><cell>565</cell></row><row><cell>497</cell><cell>349</cell></row>
<row><cell>271</cell><cell>177</cell></row><row><cell>319</cell><cell>267</cell></row><row><cell>367</cell><cell>367</cell></row><row><cell>416</cell><cell>566</cell></row><row><cell>498</cell><cell>350</cell></row>
<row><cell>272</cell><cell>178</cell></row><row><cell>320</cell><cell>268</cell></row><row><cell>368</cell><cell>421</cell></row><row><cell>417</cell><cell>567</cell></row><row><cell>499</cell><cell>422</cell></row>
<row><cell>273</cell><cell>478</cell></row><row><cell>321</cell><cell>269</cell></row><row><cell>369</cell><cell>423</cell></row><row><cell>418</cell><cell>568</cell></row><row><cell>500</cell><cell>352</cell></row>
<row><cell>274</cell><cell>479</cell></row><row><cell>322</cell><cell>270</cell></row><row><cell>370</cell><cell>324</cell></row><row><cell>419</cell><cell>569</cell></row><row><cell>501</cell><cell>353</cell></row>
<row><cell>275</cell><cell>181</cell></row><row><cell>323</cell><cell>271</cell></row><row><cell>371</cell><cell>424</cell></row><row><cell>420</cell><cell>570</cell></row><row><cell>502</cell><cell>354</cell></row>
<row><cell>276</cell><cell>182</cell></row><row><cell>324</cell><cell>272</cell></row><row><cell>372</cell><cell>425</cell></row><row><cell>421</cell><cell>571</cell></row><row><cell>503</cell><cell>355</cell></row>
<row><cell>277</cell><cell>183</cell></row><row><cell>325</cell><cell>273</cell></row><row><cell>373</cell><cell>517</cell></row><row><cell>422</cell><cell>572</cell></row><row><cell>504</cell><cell>356</cell></row>
<row><cell>278</cell><cell>186</cell></row><row><cell>326</cell><cell>274</cell></row><row><cell>374</cell><cell>419</cell></row><row><cell>423</cell><cell>573</cell></row><row><cell>505</cell><cell>357</cell></row>
<row><cell>279</cell><cell>184</cell></row><row><cell>327</cell><cell>276</cell></row><row><cell>375</cell><cell>370</cell></row><row><cell>424</cell><cell>574</cell></row><row><cell>506</cell><cell>358</cell></row>
<row><cell>280</cell><cell>185</cell></row><row><cell>328</cell><cell>277</cell></row><row><cell>376</cell><cell>371</cell></row><row><cell>425</cell><cell>759</cell></row><row><cell>508</cell><cell>359</cell></row>
<row><cell>281</cell><cell>160</cell></row><row><cell>328<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi></cell><cell>38</cell></row><row><cell>377</cell><cell>372</cell></row><row><cell>426</cell><cell>804</cell></row><row><cell>509</cell><cell>360</cell></row>
<row><cell>282</cell><cell>161</cell></row><row><cell>329</cell><cell>278</cell></row><row><cell>378</cell><cell>373</cell></row><row><cell>427</cell><cell>828</cell></row>
<row><cell>283</cell><cell>162</cell></row><row><cell>330</cell><cell>279</cell></row><row><cell>379</cell><cell>374</cell></row><row><cell>428</cell><cell>829</cell></row><row><cell>512</cell><cell>306</cell></row>
<row><cell>284</cell><cell>163</cell></row><row><cell>331</cell><cell>280</cell></row><row><cell>380</cell><cell>375</cell></row><row><cell>513</cell><cell>300</cell></row>
<row><cell>285</cell><cell>164, 165</cell></row><row><cell>332</cell><cell>62</cell></row><row><cell>381</cell><cell>368</cell></row><row><cell>463</cell><cell>313</cell></row><row><cell>514</cell><cell>301</cell></row>
<row><cell>286</cell><cell>480</cell></row><row><cell>333</cell><cell>281</cell></row><row><cell>382</cell><cell>369</cell></row><row><cell>464</cell><cell>314</cell></row><row><cell>515</cell><cell>305</cell></row>
<row><cell>287</cell><cell>166</cell></row><row><cell>334</cell><cell>282</cell></row><row><cell>383</cell><cell>518</cell></row><row><cell>465</cell><cell>315</cell></row><row><cell>516</cell><cell>302</cell></row>
<row><cell>288</cell><cell>167</cell></row><row><cell>335</cell><cell>283</cell></row><row><cell>384</cell><cell>519</cell></row><row><cell>466</cell><cell>316</cell></row><row><cell>517</cell><cell>307</cell></row>
<pb n='389'/><anchor id='Pg389'/>
<row><cell>518</cell><cell>311</cell></row><row><cell>532</cell><cell>407</cell></row><row><cell>545</cell><cell>381 </cell></row><row><cell>560</cell><cell>388 </cell></row><row><cell>572</cell><cell>572</cell></row>
<row><cell>519</cell><cell>303</cell></row><row><cell>534</cell><cell>404</cell></row><row><cell>546</cell><cell>382 </cell></row><row><cell>561</cell><cell>389 </cell></row><row><cell>573</cell><cell>395</cell></row>
<row><cell>520</cell><cell>304</cell></row><row><cell>535</cell><cell>403</cell></row><row><cell>547</cell><cell>547 </cell></row><row><cell>562</cell><cell>562 </cell></row><row><cell>574</cell><cell>362</cell></row>
<row><cell>521</cell><cell>308</cell></row><row><cell>536</cell><cell>405</cell></row><row><cell>548</cell><cell>548 </cell></row><row><cell>563</cell><cell>390 </cell></row><row><cell>804</cell><cell>412</cell></row>
<row><cell>522</cell><cell>309</cell></row><row><cell>537</cell><cell>411</cell></row><row><cell>549</cell><cell>383 </cell></row><row><cell>564</cell><cell>392 </cell></row><row><cell>923</cell><cell>288</cell></row>
<row><cell>523</cell><cell>312</cell></row><row><cell>538</cell><cell>414</cell></row><row><cell>550</cell><cell>384 </cell></row><row><cell>565</cell><cell>393</cell></row>
<row><cell>524</cell><cell>310</cell></row><row><cell>539</cell><cell>---</cell></row><row><cell>551</cell><cell>--- </cell></row><row><cell>566</cell><cell>396 </cell></row><row><cell>927</cell><cell>275</cell></row>
<row><cell>540</cell><cell>376</cell></row><row><cell>552</cell><cell>385 </cell></row><row><cell>567</cell><cell>397 </cell></row><row><cell>928</cell><cell>418</cell></row>
<row><cell>528</cell><cell>409</cell></row><row><cell>541</cell><cell>377</cell></row><row><cell>553</cell><cell>386 </cell></row><row><cell>568</cell><cell>398 </cell></row><row><cell>935</cell><cell>415</cell></row>
<row><cell>529</cell><cell>410</cell></row><row><cell>542</cell><cell>378</cell></row><row><cell>569</cell><cell>399 </cell></row><row><cell>936</cell><cell>428</cell></row>
<row><cell>530</cell><cell>408</cell></row><row><cell>543</cell><cell>379</cell></row><row><cell>556</cell><cell>387 </cell></row><row><cell>570</cell><cell>188</cell></row>
<row><cell>531</cell><cell>406</cell></row><row><cell>544</cell><cell>380</cell></row><row><cell>571</cell><cell>394</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
VI.   Apostolos.
</p>
<table rend='latexcolumns: "p{0.3cm} p{0.3cm}"; tblcolumns: "r r"'>
<row><cell>Greg.</cell><cell>Scriv.</cell></row>
<row><cell>49</cell><cell>Scholtz</cell></row><row><cell>75</cell><cell>70</cell></row><row><cell>100</cell><cell>214</cell></row><row><cell>126</cell><cell>115</cell></row><row><cell>202</cell><cell>99</cell></row>
<row><cell>50</cell><cell>Scholtz</cell></row><row><cell>76</cell><cell>198</cell></row><row><cell>101</cell><cell>216</cell></row><row><cell>127</cell><cell>169</cell></row><row><cell>203</cell><cell>100</cell></row>
<row><cell>51</cell><cell>Scholtz</cell></row><row><cell>77</cell><cell>79</cell></row><row><cell>102</cell><cell>90</cell></row><row><cell>128</cell><cell>180</cell></row><row><cell>204</cell><cell>101</cell></row>
<row><cell>52</cell><cell>Scholtz</cell></row><row><cell>78</cell><cell>78</cell></row><row><cell>103</cell><cell>83</cell></row><row><cell>129</cell><cell>184</cell></row><row><cell>205</cell><cell>102</cell></row>
<row><cell>53</cell><cell>Scholtz</cell></row><row><cell>79</cell><cell>75</cell></row><row><cell>104</cell><cell>84</cell></row><row><cell>130</cell><cell>186</cell></row><row><cell>206</cell><cell>103</cell></row>
<row><cell>54</cell><cell>Scholtz</cell></row><row><cell>80</cell><cell>71</cell></row><row><cell>105</cell><cell>85</cell></row><row><cell>---</cell><cell>---</cell></row><row><cell>207</cell><cell>104</cell></row>
<row><cell>55</cell><cell>55</cell></row><row><cell>81</cell><cell>69</cell></row><row><cell>106</cell><cell>86</cell></row><row><cell>169</cell><cell>105</cell></row><row><cell>208</cell><cell>106</cell></row>
<row><cell>56</cell><cell>56</cell></row><row><cell>82</cell><cell>77</cell></row><row><cell>107</cell><cell>87</cell></row><row><cell>170</cell><cell>170</cell></row><row><cell>209</cell><cell>107</cell></row>
<row><cell>58</cell><cell>58</cell></row><row><cell>83</cell><cell>76</cell></row><row><cell>108</cell><cell>88</cell></row><row><cell>171</cell><cell>70<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi></cell></row><row><cell>210</cell><cell>108</cell></row>
<row><cell>59</cell><cell>48</cell></row><row><cell>84</cell><cell>74</cell></row><row><cell>109</cell><cell>89</cell></row><row><cell>172</cell><cell>93</cell></row><row><cell>211</cell><cell>109</cell></row>
<row><cell>60</cell><cell>57</cell></row><row><cell>85</cell><cell>200</cell></row><row><cell>110</cell><cell>263</cell></row><row><cell>173</cell><cell>94</cell></row><row><cell>212</cell><cell>110</cell></row>
<row><cell>61</cell><cell>59</cell></row><row><cell>86</cell><cell>51</cell></row><row><cell>111</cell><cell>223</cell></row><row><cell>---</cell><cell>---</cell></row><row><cell>213</cell><cell>111</cell></row>
<row><cell>62</cell><cell>60</cell></row><row><cell>87<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi></cell><cell>201</cell></row><row><cell>112</cell><cell>81</cell></row><row><cell>180</cell><cell>73</cell></row><row><cell>214</cell><cell>112</cell></row>
<row><cell>63</cell><cell>61</cell></row><row><cell>87<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi></cell><cell>202</cell></row><row><cell>113</cell><cell>82</cell></row><row><cell>---</cell><cell>---</cell></row><row><cell>215</cell><cell>215</cell></row>
<row><cell>64</cell><cell>62</cell></row><row><cell>88</cell><cell>130</cell></row><row><cell>114</cell><cell>125</cell></row><row><cell>183</cell><cell>80</cell></row><row><cell>216</cell><cell>124</cell></row>
<row><cell>65</cell><cell>52</cell></row><row><cell>89</cell><cell>50</cell></row><row><cell>115</cell><cell>126</cell></row><row><cell>184</cell><cell>67</cell></row>
<row><cell>66</cell><cell>64</cell></row><row><cell>90</cell><cell>203</cell></row><row><cell>116</cell><cell>127</cell></row><row><cell>185</cell><cell>185</cell></row>
<row><cell>67</cell><cell>66</cell></row><row><cell>91</cell><cell>204</cell></row><row><cell>117</cell><cell>213</cell></row><row><cell>186</cell><cell>53</cell></row><row><cell>227</cell><cell>121</cell></row>
<row><cell>68</cell><cell>65</cell></row><row><cell>92</cell><cell>205</cell></row><row><cell>118</cell><cell>116</cell></row><row><cell>---</cell><cell>---</cell></row><row><cell>228</cell><cell>113</cell></row>
<row><cell>69</cell><cell>178</cell></row><row><cell>93</cell><cell>206</cell></row><row><cell>---</cell><cell>---</cell></row><row><cell>---</cell><cell>---</cell></row>
<row><cell>70</cell><cell>72</cell></row><row><cell>94</cell><cell>207</cell></row><row><cell>120</cell><cell>49</cell></row><row><cell>---</cell><cell>---</cell></row><row><cell>255</cell><cell>122</cell></row>
<row><cell>70<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi></cell><cell>172</cell></row><row><cell>95</cell><cell>208</cell></row><row><cell>121</cell><cell>119</cell></row><row><cell>197</cell><cell>91</cell></row><row><cell>256</cell><cell>128</cell></row>
<row><cell>71</cell><cell>173</cell></row><row><cell>96</cell><cell>209</cell></row><row><cell>122</cell><cell>123</cell></row><row><cell>198</cell><cell>92</cell></row>
<row><cell>72</cell><cell>183</cell></row><row><cell>97</cell><cell>210</cell></row><row><cell>123</cell><cell>120</cell></row><row><cell>199</cell><cell>199</cell></row><row><cell>262</cell><cell>129</cell></row>
<row><cell>73</cell><cell>54</cell></row><row><cell>98</cell><cell>211</cell></row><row><cell>124</cell><cell>98</cell></row><row><cell>200</cell><cell>96</cell></row><row><cell>263</cell><cell>68</cell></row>
<row><cell>74</cell><cell>197</cell></row><row><cell>99</cell><cell>212</cell></row><row><cell>125</cell><cell>114</cell></row><row><cell>201</cell><cell>97</cell></row><row><cell>264</cell><cell>117</cell></row>
</table>

</div>

<pb n='391'/><anchor id='Pg391'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='pdf'/>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Index I. Of Greek Manuscripts.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Index of Greek Manuscripts of the New Testament, arranged according to the
countries where they are and the owners to whom they belong.</hi>
</p>

<p>
(N.B.&mdash;The Reference is always made to the MSS., which are described in their
proper places.)
</p>

<lg>
<l>BRITISH EMPIRE.</l>
<l>ENGLAND.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Amherst, Lord</hi>               Evan. 887               1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Ashburnham, Earl of</hi>                          3</l>
<l>204                       Evan. 544</l>
<l>205                       Evst. 237</l>
<l>205*                      Evst. 238</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Braithwaite, J. B</hi>                            3</l>
<l>1                         Evan. 327</l>
<l>2                         Evan. 328</l>
<l>3                         Evan. 236</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>(British and Foreign Bible Soc., London)</hi>                     Evan. Ξ &amp; Evst. 200  2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Burdett-Coutts, Baroness</hi>                    19</l>
<l>B.-C.I. 1                 Evan. 612</l>
<l>II. 16, 18                Evann. 551-2</l>
<l>III. 4, 5, 9, 10          Evann. 555-8</l>
<l>III. 21                   Evst. 246</l>
<l>III. 24                   Apost. 65</l>
<l>III. 29                   Evst. 252</l>
<l>III. 34                   Evst. 247</l>
<l>III. 37                   Act.  221</l>
<l>III. 41                   Evan. 559</l>
<l>III. 42                   Evst. 253</l>
<l>III. 43, 46, 52, 53       Evst. 248, 249,250, 253<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi></l>
<l>III. 44                   Apost. 78</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>(Cambridge)&mdash;</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>University Library</hi>                             25</l>
<l>Dd. 8. 23                 Evst. 146</l>
<l>Dd. 8. 49                 Evst. 4</l>
<l>Dd. 9. 69                 Evan. 60</l>
<l>Dd. 11. 90                Act. 21</l>
<l>Ff. 1. 30                 Paul. 27</l>
<l>Hh. 6. 12                 Evan. 609</l>
<l>Kk. v. 35                 Evan.  62</l>
<l>Kk. 6. 4                  Act. 9</l>
<l>Ll. 2. 13                 Evan. 70</l>
<l>Mm. 6. 9                  Evan. 440</l>
<l>Nn. 2. 36                 Evan. 443</l>
<l>Nn. 2. 41 (Bezae)         Evan. D</l>
<l>Add. 679. 1               Evst. 291</l>
<l>679. 2               Apost. 79</l>
<l>720                  Evan. 618</l>
<l>1836                 Evst. 292</l>
<l>1837                 Evan. 619</l>
<l>1839                 Evst. 293</l>
<l>1840                 Evst. 294</l>
<l>1875                 Evan. T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi></l>
<l>1879. 2              Evst. 295</l>
<l>1879. 11             Evan. 620</l>
<l>1879. 12             Evst. 296</l>
<l>1879. 13             Evst. 297</l>
<l>1879. 24             Evan. 621</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Christ's College</hi>                                2</l>
<l>F. i. 8                   Evst. 222</l>
<l>F. i. 13                  Act. 24</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Clare College</hi>              Evst. 488                1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Emmanuel College</hi>                                 1</l>
<l>I. 4. 35                  Act. 53</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Gonville and Caius College</hi>                        1</l>
<l>403                       Evan. 59</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Trinity College</hi>                                 6</l>
<l>B. viii. 5                Evan. W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi></l>
<l>B. x. 16                  Evan. 507</l>
<l>B. x. 17                  Evan. 508</l>
<l>B. xvii. 1 (Augiens.)     Paul. F</l>
<l>O. iv. 22                 Evst. 221</l>
<l>O. viii. 3                Evan. 66</l>
</lg>

<pb n='392'/><anchor id='Pg392'/>

<lg>
<l>(<hi rend='bold'>Cheltenham</hi>)&mdash;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Fenwick</hi>, Middle Hill                  10</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1284           Evan. 527</l>
<l>1461          Act. 178</l>
<l>2387          Evan. 528</l>
<l>3886          Evan. 529</l>
<l>3887          Evan. 530</l>
<l>7681          Act. 198</l>
<l>7682          Evan. 531</l>
<l>7712          Evan. 532</l>
<l>7757          Evan. 533</l>
<l>13975          Evan. 526</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Coniston</hi>, Ruskin        Evst. 254                  1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Crawford, Earl of</hi>       Evann. 1320, 1321         2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Herries, Lord</hi>           Evan. 580                 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>(<hi rend='bold'>Holkham</hi>)&mdash;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Earl of Leicester</hi>                               2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3             Evan. 524</l>
<l>4             Evan. 525</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>(<hi rend='bold'>Lambeth Palace</hi>)                                   25</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cod. 528                      Evan. 71</l>
<l>1175                      Evan. 509</l>
<l>1176                      Evan. 510</l>
<l>1177                      Evan. 511</l>
<l>1178                      Evan. 512</l>
<l>1179                      Evan. 513</l>
<l>1180                      Evan. 514</l>
<l>1181? (or 1255)           Act. 186</l>
<l>1182                      Act. 182</l>
<l>1183                      Act. 183</l>
<l>1184                      Act. 184</l>
<l>1185                      Act. 185</l>
<l>1186                      Paul. 256</l>
<l>1187, 1188, 1189          Evst. 223-5</l>
<l>1190, 1191                Apost. 59, 60</l>
<l>1192                      Evan. 5</l>
<l>1193                      Evst. 226</l>
<l>1194                      Evst. 363</l>
<l>1195, 1196                Apost. 61-2</l>
<l>1255 or C. 4              Evan. 516</l>
<l>1350                      Evan. 517</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>(<hi rend='bold'>Leicester</hi>)              Evan. 69 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>(<hi rend='bold'>London</hi>)&mdash;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>British Museum</hi>                                 136</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Codex Alexandrinus</l>
<l>Arundel 524                     Evan. 566</l>
<l>534                     Paul. 372</l>
<l>536                     Evst. 256</l>
<l>547                     Evst. 257</l>
<l>Burney 18                       Evan. 568</l>
<l>19                       Evan. 569</l>
<l>20                       Evan. 570</l>
<l>21                       Evan. 571</l>
<l>22                       Evst. 259</l>
<l>Burney 23                       Evan. 572</l>
<l>48                       Act. 225</l>
<l>408                       Evst. 499</l>
<l>Cotton, Vesp. B. xviii.         Apost. 2</l>
<l>Titus C. xv             Evan. N</l>
<l>Egerton 2163                    Evst. 59</l>
<l>2610                    Evan. 604</l>
<l>2783                    Evan. 563</l>
<l>2784                    Evan. 565</l>
<l>2785                    Evan. 564</l>
<l>2786                    Evst. 255</l>
<l>2787                    Act. 223</l>
<l>Harleian 1810                   Evan. 113</l>
<l>5537                   Act. 25</l>
<l>5538                   Evan. 567</l>
<l>5540                   Evan. 114</l>
<l>5552                   Paul. 66</l>
<l>5557                   Act. 26</l>
<l>5559                   Evan. 115</l>
<l>5561                   Evst. 258</l>
<l>5567                   Evan. 116</l>
<l>5588                   Act. 59</l>
<l>5598                   Evst. 150</l>
<l>5613                   Paul. M, Act. 60</l>
<l>5620                   Act. 27</l>
<l>5647                   Evan. 72</l>
<l>5650                   Evst. 25, 25<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi></l>
<l>5678                   Apoc. 31</l>
<l>5684                   Evan. G</l>
<l>5731                   Evan. 117</l>
<l>5736                   Evan. 445</l>
<l>5776                   Evan. 65</l>
<l>5777                   Evan. 446</l>
<l>5778                   Act. 28</l>
<l>5784                   Evan. 447</l>
<l>5785                   Evst. 151</l>
<l>5787                   Evst. 152</l>
<l>5790                   Evan. 448</l>
<l>5796                   Evan. 444</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Royal MS. I. B. I.              Act. 20</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Additional Manuscripts&mdash;</l>
<l>4949                         Evan. 44</l>
<l>4950, 4951                   Evan. 449</l>
<l>5107                         Evan. 439</l>
<l>5111, 5112                   Evan. 438</l>
<l>5115, 5116                   Act. 22</l>
<l>5117                         Evan. 109</l>
<l>5153                         Evst. 260</l>
<l>5468                         Evan. 573</l>
<l>7141                         Evan. 574</l>
<l>7142                         Paul. 267</l>
<l>10068                         Evst. 926</l>
<l>11300                         Evan. 575</l>
<l>11836                         Evan. 576</l>
<l>11837                         Evan. 201</l>
<l>11838                         Evan. 577</l>
<l>11839                         Evan. 578</l>
<l>11840                         Evst. 261</l>
<l>11841                         Apost. 75</l>
<l>11859-60                      Evan. 608</l>
<l>11868                         Evan. 579</l>
<pb n='393'/><anchor id='Pg393'/>
<l>14637, 14638      Evst. 496-7</l>
<l>14744             Evan. 202</l>
<l>15581             Evan. 580</l>
<l>16183             Evan. 581</l>
<l>16184             Evan. 582</l>
<l>16943             Evan. 583</l>
<l>17136             Evan. N<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi></l>
<l>17211             Evan. R</l>
<l>17370             Evst. 262</l>
<l>17469             Evan. 584</l>
<l>17470             Evan. 585</l>
<l>17741             Evan. 586</l>
<l>17982             Evan. 587</l>
<l>18211             Evan. 588</l>
<l>18212             Evst. 263</l>
<l>19386             Evan. 110</l>
<l>19387             Evan. 589</l>
<l>19388             Act. 229</l>
<l>19389             Evan. 590</l>
<l>19392             Act. 230</l>
<l>19459             Evst. 930</l>
<l>19460             Evst. 264</l>
<l>19737             Evst. 265</l>
<l>19993             Evst. 266</l>
<l>20003             Act. 61</l>
<l>21260             Evst. 267</l>
<l>21261             Evst. 268</l>
<l>22506             Evan. 591</l>
<l>22734             Act. 107</l>
<l>22735             Evst. 269</l>
<l>22736             Evan. 592</l>
<l>23737             Evan. 593</l>
<l>22738             Evan. 594</l>
<l>22739             Evan. 595</l>
<l>22740             Evan. 596</l>
<l>22741             Evan. 597</l>
<l>22742             Evst. 270</l>
<l>22743             Evst. 271</l>
<l>22744             Evst. 272</l>
<l>24112             Evan. 598</l>
<l>24373             Evan. 599</l>
<l>24374             Evst. 273</l>
<l>24376             Evan. 600</l>
<l>24377             Evst. 274</l>
<l>24378             Evst. 275</l>
<l>24379             Evst. 276</l>
<l>24380             Evst. 277</l>
<l>25881             Evst. 38</l>
<l>26103             Evan. 601</l>
<l>27860             Evst. 278</l>
<l>27861             Evan. 602</l>
<l>28815             Evan. 603</l>
<l>28816             Act. 232</l>
<l>28817             Evst. 279</l>
<l>28818             Evst. 280</l>
<l>29713             Evst. 62</l>
<l>29714             Apost. 69</l>
<l>31208             Evst. 281</l>
<l>31919             Evst. 282</l>
<l>                  Evan. Υ</l>
<l>31920             Evst. 283</l>
<l>31921             Evst. 284</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Add. MSS. (<hi rend='italic'>cont.</hi>)&mdash;</l>
<l>31949             Evst. 285</l>
<l>32051             Apost. 52</l>
<l>32277             Evan. 892</l>
<l>32341             Evan. 325</l>
<l>34059             Evst· 39</l>
<l>34107             Evan. 321</l>
<l>34108             Evan. 322</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Butler</hi>            Evan. 632      1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Highgate, Burdett-Coutts</hi>        20</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>I. 2            Evst. 239</l>
<l>I. 3, 4, 7      Evann. 545-7</l>
<l>I. 8            Evst. 240</l>
<l>I. 9            Evan. 548</l>
<l>I. 10           Evst. 251</l>
<l>I. 23, 24       Evst. 241-2</l>
<l>II. 4           Evan. 603</l>
<l>II. 5           Evst. 243</l>
<l>II. 5 (?), II. 14      Evst. 494-5</l>
<l>II. 7, 13              Evann. 549-50</l>
<l>II. 23                 Evst. 244</l>
<l>II. 26<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>, 26<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>     Evann. 553-4</l>
<l>II.30                  Evst. 245</l>
<l>III. 1                 Act. 220</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Sion College</hi>                     4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>A. 32. I (1)           Evst. 227</l>
<l>A. 32. I (2)           Evst. 228</l>
<l>A. 32. I (3)           Evan. 518</l>
<l>A. 32. I (4)           Evst. 229</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>(<hi rend='bold'>Manchester</hi>)                     1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rylands Libr.          Evan. 886</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>(<hi rend='bold'>Oxford</hi>)&mdash;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Bodleian</hi>                     78</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barocc.  3         Act. 23</l>
<l>29         Evan. 46</l>
<l>31         Evan. 45</l>
<l>48         Apoc. 28</l>
<l>59         Evan. 610</l>
<l>197         Evst. 201</l>
<l>202         Evst. 5</l>
<l>Canon. Gr. 33      Evan. 288</l>
<l>34      Evan. 488</l>
<l>36      Evan. 489</l>
<l>85      Evst. 202</l>
<l>92      Evst. 203</l>
<l>110      Act. 212</l>
<l>112      Evan. 490</l>
<l>119      Evst. 204</l>
<l>122      Evan. 491</l>
<l>126      Evst. 205</l>
<l>E. D. Clarke 4     Act. 56</l>
<l>5     Evan. 98</l>
<l>6     Evan. 107</l>
<l>7     Evan, 111</l>
<l>8     Evst. 157</l>
<l>9     Act. 58</l>
<l>10     Evan. 112</l>
<l>45     Evst. 206</l>
<pb n='394'/><anchor id='Pg394'/>
<l>E. D Clarke 46      Evst. 207</l>
<l>47      Evst. 208</l>
<l>48      Evst. 209</l>
<l>Cromwell 11         Evst. 30</l>
<l>15         Evan. 482</l>
<l>16         Evan. 483</l>
<l>27         Evst. 210</l>
<l>Laud 3              Evan. 52</l>
<l>31              Evan. 51</l>
<l>32              Evst. 18</l>
<l>33              Evan. 50</l>
<l>34              Evst. 20</l>
<l>35              Act. E</l>
<l>Misc. Gr. 1         Evan. 48</l>
<l>5         Evan. O<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi></l>
<l>8         Evan. 96</l>
<l>9         Evan. 47</l>
<l>10         Evst. 19</l>
<l>11         Evst. 28</l>
<l>12         Evst. 29</l>
<l>13         Evan. 118</l>
<l>17         Evan. 484</l>
<l>74         Act. 30</l>
<l>76         Evan. 67</l>
<l>118         Act. 213</l>
<l>119         Evst. 211</l>
<l>136         Evan. 105</l>
<l>140         Evst. 212</l>
<l>141         Evan. 485</l>
<l>293         Evan. 486</l>
<l>305         Evan. 606</l>
<l>306         Evan. 607</l>
<l>307         Evst. 288</l>
<l>308         Evst. 289</l>
<l>310         Evan. Λ</l>
<l>313         Evan. Γ</l>
<l>314         Evan. 737</l>
<l>319         Apost. 76</l>
<l>323         Evan. 81</l>
<l>MS. Bibl. Gr. d. 1      Evan. 562</l>
<l>e. 1      Evan. 82</l>
<l>Roe 1                   Evan. 49</l>
<l>16                   Paul. 47</l>
<l>Selden supra (1) 2      Evst. 26</l>
<l>(2) 3      Evst. 27</l>
<l>(6) 5      Evan. 55</l>
<l>(28) 53     Evan. 53</l>
<l>(29) 54     Evan. 54</l>
<l>B. 54 (47)        Evst. 22</l>
<l>B. 56 (49)        Evst. 21</l>
<l>Arch. 9          Apost. 74</l>
<l>MS. Gr. Lit. c. 1       T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>f</hi></l>
<l>MS. Clar. Pr. b. 2      T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>woid</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Christ Church</hi>            29</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wake 13      Evan. W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi></l>
<l>12      Evan. 492</l>
<l>13      Evst. 213</l>
<l>14      Evst. 214</l>
<l>15      Evst. 215</l>
<l>16      Evst. 216</l>
<l>17      Evst. 217</l>
<l>18      Evst. 218</l>
<l>Wake 19      Evst. 219</l>
<l>20      Evan. 74</l>
<l>21      Evan. 493</l>
<l>22      Evan. 494</l>
<l>23      Evst. 220</l>
<l>24      Evan. 495</l>
<l>25      Evan. 496</l>
<l>26      Evan. 73</l>
<l>27      Evan. 497</l>
<l>28      Evan. 498</l>
<l>29      Evan. 499</l>
<l>30      Evan. 500</l>
<l>31      Evan. 501</l>
<l>32      Evan. 502</l>
<l>33      Apost. 58</l>
<l>34      Evan. 503</l>
<l>36      Evan. 504</l>
<l>37      Evan. W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>f</hi> &amp; Act. 192</l>
<l>38      Act. 191</l>
<l>39      Evan. 505</l>
<l>40      Evan. 506</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Keble College</hi>      Evst. 298      1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Lincoln College</hi>      6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>4      Evst. 63</l>
<l>15      Evst. 3</l>
<l>16      Evan. 95</l>
<l>17      Evan. 68 &amp; Evst. 199</l>
<l>18      Evan. 56</l>
<l>82      Act. 33</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Magdalen College</hi>            2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>7      Paul. 42</l>
<l>9      Evan. 57</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>New College</hi>            3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>58      Act. 36</l>
<l>59      Act. 37</l>
<l>68      Evan. 58</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>(<hi rend='bold'>Parham Park, Sussex</hi>)            17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Lord de la Zouche.</hi></l>
<l>66. 1      Evst. 233</l>
<l>67. 2      Apoc. 96</l>
<l>71. 6      Evan. 534</l>
<l>72. 7      Evan. 535</l>
<l>73. 8      Evan. 536</l>
<l>74. 9      Evan. 537</l>
<l>75. 10      Evan. 538</l>
<l>76. 11      Evan. 539</l>
<l>77. 12      Evan. 540</l>
<l>78. 13      Evan. 541</l>
<l>79. 14      Act. 216</l>
<l>80. 15      Act. 217</l>
<l>81. 16      Act. 218</l>
<l>82. 17      Apoc. 95</l>
<l>83. 18      Evst. 234</l>
<l>84. 19      Evst. 235</l>
<l>85. 20      Evst. 236</l>
</lg>

<pb n='395'/><anchor id='Pg395'/>


<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Quaritch</hi> i             Evan. 469      4</l>
<l>ii            Evan. 471</l>
<l>viii          Evst. 935</l>
<l>Formerly      Evan. 885</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Ruskin, John</hi>           Evst. 254      1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Swete, H. B., Dr.</hi>      Evan. 736      2</l>
<l>Evan. 737</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>White, Mr.</hi>             Evan. 523      1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Winchelsea, Earl of</hi>    Evan. 106      1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>(<hi rend='bold'>Wisbech</hi>)&mdash;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Peckover</hi>                                   5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1                    Evan. 560</l>
<l>2                    Evan. 561</l>
<l>Apost. 43</l>
<l>70                   Evst. 500</l>
<l>Apost. 203</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Woolwich</hi> ?, Bate       Evst. 492      1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Wordsworth, Bp.</hi>        Evan. 542      1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>IRELAND.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>(<hi rend='bold'>Dublin</hi>)&mdash;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Trinity College</hi>                       3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evan. Z</l>
<l>D. i. 28             Paul. 490</l>
<l>A. i. 2, fol. 1      Evst. 454</l>
</lg>

<p>
SCOTLAND.
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Bute</hi>                   Evan. 64       1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>(<hi rend='bold'>Edinburgh</hi>)                           5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Libr. A. c. 25         Evan. 519</l>
<l>Mackellar              Evan. 896</l>
<l>                       Act. 333</l>
<l>Univ. D. Laing 6, 667  Evann. 897-8</l>
<l>Univ. Laing            Evst. 578</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<hi rend='bold'>Glasgow</hi>)&mdash;
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Hunter Museum</hi>                         7</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>V. 3. 3                Evst. 231</l>
<l>V. 3. 4                Apost. 45</l>
<l>V. 4. 3                Evst. 232</l>
<l>V. 5. 10               Evst. 230</l>
<l>V. 7. 2                Evan. 520</l>
<l>Q. 7. 10               Evan. 521</l>
<l>S. 8. 141              Evan. 522</l>
<l>Duke of Hamilton's collection.</l>
</lg>

<p>
NEW ZEALAND.
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Auckland</hi>               Evan. 1273     2</l>
<l>                                            Evst. 420</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>FOREIGN COUNTRIES.</l>
<l>BELGIUM.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Brussels</hi>                              2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reg. 11358. 11375      Evann. 881-2</l>
</lg>

<p>
DENMARK.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Copenhagen</hi>                            3
</p>

<lg>
<l>Havniensis 1322      Evan. 234</l>
<l>1323      Evan. 235</l>
<l>1324      Evst. 44</l>
</lg>

<p>
EGYPT.
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Cairo</hi>                                 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cod. P. Kerameus                  Evan. T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>g</hi></l>
<l>Patr. Alex. 2, 15, 16,</l>
<l>17, 68                      Evann. 643-7</l>
<l>421, 952                     Evann. 903-4</l>
<l>82, 87                      Evann. 1270-1</l>
<l>8, 59, 88                  Act. 253-5</l>
<l>942                          Act. 381</l>
<l>18                          Evst. 140</l>
<l>927, 929, 943,</l>
<l>944, 945, 946,</l>
<l>948, 950, 951,</l>
<l>953                          Evst. 760-9</l>
<l>Μετοικία of St. Cath. 7 Evan. 648</l>
</lg>

<p>
FRANCE.
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Arras</hi> 970                    Evan. 872      1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Besançon</hi> 41                  Apost. 51      2</l>
<l>44                  Evst. 193</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Bordier, Henri</hi>               Evst. 505      1
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Carpentras</hi> 11                Evst. 189      1
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Dessau</hi>                       Evan. 874      2</l>
<l>200                      Paul. 374</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Montpelier</hi>, Sch. M. 446      Evan. 871      2</l>
<l>405      Evst. 504</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Paris</hi>&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>National Library</hi>                          298
</p>

<lg>
<l>Nat. Gr. RI 9      C</l>
<l>13             Evst. 415</l>
<l>14             Evan. 33</l>
<l>19             Apoc. 58</l>
<l>47             Evan. 18</l>
<l>48             Evan. M</l>
<l>49             Evan. 8</l>
<l>50             Evan. 13</l>
<l>51             Evan. 260</l>
<l>52             Evan. 261</l>
<l>53             Evan. 262</l>
<l>54             Evan. 16</l>
<l>55             Evan. 17</l>
<l>56             Act. 51</l>
<l>57             Act. 114</l>
<pb n='396'/><anchor id='Pg396'/>
<l>58             Act. 115</l>
<l>59             Act. 116</l>
<l>60             Act. 62</l>
<l>61             Evan. 263</l>
<l>62             Evan. L</l>
<l>63             Evan. K</l>
<l>64             Evan. 15</l>
<l>65             Evan. 264</l>
<l>66             Evan. 265</l>
<l>67             Evan. 266</l>
<l>68             Evan. 21</l>
<l>69             Evan. 267</l>
<l>70             Evan. 14</l>
<l>71             Evan. 7</l>
<l>72             Evan. 22</l>
<l>73             Evan. 268</l>
<l>74             Evan. 269</l>
<l>75             Evan. 270</l>
<l>76             Evan. 272</l>
<l>77             Evan. 23</l>
<l>78             Evan. 26</l>
<l>79             Evan. 273</l>
<l>80             Evan. 275</l>
<l>81             Evan. 276</l>
<l>81a            Evan. 277</l>
<l>82             Evan. 278</l>
<l>83             Evan. 9</l>
<l>84             Evan. 4</l>
<l>85             Evan. 119</l>
<l>86             Evan. 279</l>
<l>87             Evan. 280</l>
<l>88             Evan. 281</l>
<l>89             Evan. 29</l>
<l>90             Evan. 282</l>
<l>91             Evan. 10</l>
<l>92             Evan. 283</l>
<l>93             Evan. 284</l>
<l>94             Evan. 31</l>
<l>95             Evan. 285</l>
<l>96             Evan. 286</l>
<l>97             Evan. 743</l>
<l>98             Evan. 287</l>
<l>99             Evan. 288</l>
<l>100             Evan. 30</l>
<l>100a            Evan. 289</l>
<l>101             Act. 118</l>
<l>102             Act. 7</l>
<l>102a            Act. 119</l>
<l>103             Act. 11</l>
<l>103a            Act. 120</l>
<l>104             Act. 121</l>
<l>105             Act. 122</l>
<l>106             Evan. 5</l>
<l>106a            Act. 123</l>
<l>107             Paul. D</l>
<l>108             Paul. 145</l>
<l>109             Paul. 146</l>
<l>110             Paul. 147</l>
<l>111             Paul. 148</l>
<l>112             Evan. 106</l>
<l>113             Evan. 291</l>
<l>114             Evan. 292</l>
<l>115             Evan. 27</l>
<l>116             Evan. 32</l>
<l>117             Evan. 293</l>
<l>118             Evan. 294</l>
<l>119             Evan. 744</l>
<l>120             Evan. 295</l>
<l>121, 122        Evan, 11</l>
<l>123             Evan. 296</l>
<l>124             Act. 124</l>
<l>125             Act. 125</l>
<l>126             Paul. 151</l>
<l>177             Evan. 299</l>
<l>178             Evan. 24</l>
<l>179             Evan. 745</l>
<l>181             Evan. 746</l>
<l>182             Evan. 747 and Evst. 61</l>
<l>183             Evan. 748</l>
<l>184             Evan. 749</l>
<l>185             Evan. 750</l>
<l>186             Evan. 300</l>
<l>187             Evan. 301</l>
<l>188             Evan. 20</l>
<l>189             Evan. 19</l>
<l>190             Evan. 751</l>
<l>191             Evan. 25</l>
<l>192             Evan. 752</l>
<l>193             Evan. 302</l>
<l>194             Evan. 304</l>
<l>194a            Evan. 303</l>
<l>195             Evan. 305</l>
<l>196?            Evan. 103</l>
<l>196             Evan. 753</l>
<l>197             Evan. 306</l>
<l>198             Evan. 754</l>
<l>199             Evan. 307</l>
<l>200             Evan. 308</l>
<l>201             Evan. 309</l>
<l>202             Evan. 310</l>
<l>203             Evan. 311</l>
<l>204             Evan. 755</l>
<l>205             Evan. 756</l>
<l>206             Evan. 312</l>
<l>207             Evan. 757</l>
<l>208             Evan. 313</l>
<l>209             Evan. 314</l>
<l>210             Evan. 315</l>
<l>211             Evan. 316</l>
<l>212             Evan. 317</l>
<l>213             Evan. 318</l>
<l>216             Act. 126</l>
<l>217             Act. 127</l>
<l>218             Act. 128</l>
<l>219             Act. 12</l>
<l>220             Act. 129</l>
<l>221             Act. 130</l>
<l>222             Paul. 157</l>
<l>223             Act. 131</l>
<l>224             Paul. 159</l>
<l>224a            Paul. 375</l>
<l>225             Paul. 160</l>
<l>226             Paul. 161</l>
<pb n='397'/><anchor id='Pg397'/>
<l>227            Paul. 162</l>
<l>228, 263       Evst. 427-8</l>
<l>230            Evan. 12</l>
<l>231            Evan. 319</l>
<l>232            Evan. 320</l>
<l>234            Evan. 761</l>
<l>235            Evan. 762 and Evst. 426</l>
<l>237            Act. 10</l>
<l>238            Paul. 163</l>
<l>239            Apoc. 62</l>
<l>240            Apoc. 139</l>
<l>241            Apoc. 63</l>
<l>276            Evst. 82</l>
<l>277            Evst. 63</l>
<l>278            Evst. 1</l>
<l>279            Evst. 17</l>
<l>280            Evst. 2</l>
<l>281            Evst. 64</l>
<l>282            Evst. 65</l>
<l>283            Evst. 66</l>
<l>284            Evst. 67</l>
<l>285            Evst. 68</l>
<l>286            Evst. 69</l>
<l>287            Evst. 10</l>
<l>288            Evst. 70</l>
<l>289            Evst. 71</l>
<l>290            Evst. 72, 72<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi></l>
<l>291            Evst. 73</l>
<l>292            Evst. 74</l>
<l>293            Evst. 75</l>
<l>294            Evst. 83</l>
<l>295            Evst. 76</l>
<l>296            Evst. 77</l>
<l>297            Evst. 16</l>
<l>298            Evst. 78</l>
<l>299            Evst. 79</l>
<l>300            Evst. 80</l>
<l>301            Evst. 7</l>
<l>302            Evst. 15</l>
<l>303            Evst. 101</l>
<l>304            Apost. 22</l>
<l>305            Evst. 81</l>
<l>306            Apost. 23</l>
<l>307            Evst. 9</l>
<l>308            Apost. 24</l>
<l>309            Evst. 11</l>
<l>310            Evst. 12</l>
<l>311            Evst. 86</l>
<l>312            Evst. 8</l>
<l>313            Evst. 87</l>
<l>314            Evst. 88 and Evan. W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi></l>
<l>315            Evst. 14</l>
<l>316            Evst. 89</l>
<l>317            Evst. 90</l>
<l>318            Evst. 91</l>
<l>319            Apost. 25</l>
<l>320            Apost. 26</l>
<l>321            Apost. 27</l>
<l>324            Evst. 92</l>
<l>326            Evst. 93</l>
<l>330            Evst. 94</l>
<l>373            Apost. 30</l>
<l>374            Evst. 95</l>
<l>375            Evst. 60</l>
<l>376            Evan. 324</l>
<l>377            Evst. 98</l>
<l>378            Evan. 326</l>
<l>379            Evan. 28</l>
<l>380            Evst. 99</l>
<l>381            Evst. 100</l>
<l>382            Apost. 33</l>
<l>383            Apost. 34</l>
<l>491            Apoc. 61</l>
<l>849            Paul. 164</l>
<l>922, fol. A    Apost. 201</l>
<l>975            Evst. 299</l>
<l>1775            Evan. 764</l>
<l>24, 29        Evst. 416-7</l>
<l>27            Evst. 158</l>
<l>32            Evst. 84</l>
<l>33            Evst. 85</l>
<l>50            Evst. 58</l>
<l>74            Evst. 366</l>
<l>75            Evan. 271</l>
<l>79            Evan. 274</l>
<l>99            Apoc. 59</l>
<l>104            Apost. 11</l>
<l>108            Evan. 290</l>
<l>115            Evst. 96</l>
<l>118            Evan. 323</l>
<l>140            Evan. 297</l>
<l>159            Evan. 738</l>
<l>175            Evan. 298</l>
<l>185            Evan. 120</l>
<l>219            Evan. 759</l>
<l>227            Evan. 633</l>
<l>242            Evst. 159</l>
<l>567            Evst. 367</l>
<l>611, 612       Evann. 740-1</l>
<l>686, 687, 758  Evst. 421-3</l>
<l>800            Apost. 130</l>
<l>804            Apost. 202</l>
<l>805            Evst. 324</l>
<l>834            Evst. 424</l>
<l>903            Evan. 758</l>
<l>904            Evan. 773</l>
<l>905            Evst. 425</l>
<l>906            Act. 263</l>
<l>911            Evan. 634</l>
<l>914            Evan. 742</l>
<l>919            Evan. 739</l>
<l>1001            Paul. 338</l>
<l>1035            Evan. 760</l>
<l>1076            Evan. 763</l>
<l>1080            Evan. 771</l>
<l>1081            Evst. 517</l>
<l>1083            Evan. 772</l>
<l>1096            Evst. 419</l>
<l>Nat. Coisl. 1         Evan. F<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi></l>
<l>19         Evan. 329</l>
<l>20         Evan. 36</l>
<pb n='398'/><anchor id='Pg398'/>
<l>21                  Evan. 37</l>
<l>22                  Evan. 40</l>
<l>23                  Evan. 39</l>
<l>24                  Evan. 41</l>
<l>25                  Act. 15</l>
<l>26                  Act. 16</l>
<l>27                  Paul. 20</l>
<l>28                  Paul. 23</l>
<l>31                  Evst. 13</l>
<l>95                  Paul. 339</l>
<l>128                  Evan. 765</l>
<l>129                  Evan. 766</l>
<l>195                  Evan. 34</l>
<l>196                  Evan. 330</l>
<l>197                  Evan. 331</l>
<l>198                  Evan. 767</l>
<l>199                  Evan. 35</l>
<l>200                  Evan. 38</l>
<l>201                  Evan. 1264</l>
<l>202                  Paul. H</l>
<l>202, 2               Act. 18</l>
<l>203                  Evan. 768</l>
<l>204                  Paul. 59</l>
<l>205                  Act. 17</l>
<l>206                  Evan. 769</l>
<l>207                  Evan. 770</l>
<l>217                  Paul. 340</l>
<l>224                  Act. 264</l>
<l>95, 217              Paul. 339-40</l>
<l>29, 30, 95, 217      Paul. 378-81</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Arsenal of Paris</hi>                  1
</p>

<p>
(Gr.) 4                     Evan. 43
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Louvre, Egypt. Mus.</hi> Paul. T       1
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Miller, Emman.</hi>, 4, 5              9
</p>

<lg>
<l>6, 7                      Evst. 506-9</l>
<l>8, 9, 10, 11, 12            Evst. 512-16</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Par. Bibl. Arm.</hi> 8409            Evan. 43      1
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Par. Nat. Armén.</hi> 9             Act. 240      1
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Royal Institute at Paris</hi> 3       Evan. 288     1
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>St. Geneviève A. O.</hi> 34         Evan. 121     2
</p>

<p>
A. O. 35                  Act. 210
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Poictiers</hi>                   Evan. 472     1
</p>

<p>
GERMANY.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Berlin</hi>                                     24
</p>

<lg>
<l>Kön. Gr. 4to, 39, 47,</l>
<l>55, 66, 67; 8vo, 3,</l>
<l>4, 9                  Evann. 635-42</l>
<l>13                      Evan. 823</l>
<l>12                 Evan. 876</l>
<l>51, 52, 53; 4to, 46,</l>
<l>61, 64                Evst. 370-5</l>
<l>4to, 40, 43, 57; 8vo,</l>
<l>9                     Act. 249-52</l>
<l>Hamilton 244              Act. 248</l>
<l>245, 246                Evst. 368-9</l>
<l>12mo, 10                Evan. 400</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Dresden</hi>                                    10
</p>

<lg>
<l>Boerner                   Paul. G</l>
<l>Reg. A. 95                Apoc. 90</l>
<l>100                Evan. 254</l>
<l>104                Act. 98</l>
<l>123                Evan. 258</l>
<l>124                Apoc. 32</l>
<l>145                Evan. 252</l>
<l>172                Evan. 241</l>
<l>187                Apoc. 112</l>
<l>151                Evst. 57</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Frankfort-on-Oder</hi>           Act. 42      1</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Giessen</hi>                     Evan. 97      1
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Gottingen</hi>                   Evan. 89      2
</p>

<p>
Gottingen 2               Apost. 5
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Groningen</hi>                                 1
</p>

<p>
Univ. A. C. 1             Paul. 418
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Hamburg</hi>                                   3
</p>

<lg>
<l>Wolf. B                   Evan. H</l>
<l>City Libr.                Paul. M or 53</l>
<l>City Libr. 1252           Act. 45</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Leipzig</hi>                                   6
</p>

<lg>
<l>Matt. 18                  Evan. 99</l>
<l>Matt. s.                  Paul. 76</l>
<l>Tischendorf i.            Evan. Θ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi></l>
<l>Tischendorf iv.           Evan. 478</l>
<l>Tischendorf v.            Evst. 190</l>
<l>Tischendorf vi.           Apost. 71</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Munich</hi>&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Univ. Libr.</hi> 1/26             Evan. X      1
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Royal Library</hi>                          27</l>
<l>23                       Apoc. 81</l>
<l>35                       Paul. 129</l>
<l>36                       Evan. 423</l>
<l>37                       Evan. 425</l>
<l>83                       Evan. 424</l>
<l>99                       Evan. 432</l>
<l>110                       Paul. 127</l>
<l>208                       Evan. 429</l>
<l>210                       Evan. 422</l>
<l>211                       Act. 179</l>
<l>248                       Apoc. 79</l>
<l>326                       Evst. 154</l>
<l>329                       Evst. 34</l>
<l>375                       Act. 46</l>
<l>381                       Evan. 428</l>
<l>383                       Evst. 24</l>
<l>412                       Paul. 54</l>
<l>437                       Evan. 430</l>
<l>455                       Paul. 126</l>
<l>465                       Evan. 427</l>
<l>473                       Evan. 426</l>
<l>504                       Paul. 125</l>
<l>518                       Evan. 83</l>
<l>544                       Apoc. 80</l>
<l>568                       Evan. 84</l>
<l>569                       Evan. 85</l>
<l>594                       Evan. 875</l>
</lg>

<pb n='399'/><anchor id='Pg399'/>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Nüremburg</hi>                   Evst. 31               1
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Oettingen-Wallerstein, Prince of</hi>   Apoc. 1                1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Pesth</hi>                                       2</l>
<l>Eubeswald                 Evan. 100</l>
<l>Jancovich                 Evan. 78</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Posen</hi>                                       1</l>
</lg>

<p>
Lycaei Aug.                 Evan. 86
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Saxe-Gotha</hi>                                  1</l>
<l>Ducal, MS. 78             Evst. 32</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>[<hi rend='bold'>Strasburg</hi>                                  3</l>
<l>From Molsheim (destroyed)      Evan. 431]</l>
<l>Ed. Reuss              Evan. 877</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Trèves</hi>                                       2</l>
<l>Cuzan                  Evan. 87</l>
<l>Cath. Libr. 143        Evst. 179</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Tubingen</hi>                 Evst. R                     2</l>
<l>2                      Evst. 481</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Vienna&mdash;</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Imperial Library</hi>                          44
</p>

<lg>
<l>Vind. Caes. Ness.</l>
<l>1                  Evan. 218</l>
<l>2                  Evan. N</l>
<l>15                  Evst. 45</l>
<l>28                  Evan. 76</l>
<l>29                  Evan. 77</l>
<l>30                  Evan. 123</l>
<l>31                  Evan. 124</l>
<l>32                  Evan. 219</l>
<l>33                  Evan. 220</l>
<l>34                  Act. 66</l>
<l>35                  Act. 63</l>
<l>36                  Act. 64</l>
<l>37                  Act. 67</l>
<l>38                  Evan. 221</l>
<l>39                  Evan. 222</l>
<l>40                  Evan. 223</l>
<l>41                  Evst. 155</l>
<l>42                  Evan. 434</l>
<l>46                  Paul. 214</l>
<l>248                  Apoc. 35</l>
<l>Vind. Caes. Suppl. Gr.</l>
<l>4                   Evan. 108</l>
<l>5                   Evan. 3</l>
<l>6                   Evan. 125</l>
<l>7                   Evst. 46</l>
<l>8                   Evan. 224</l>
<l>9                   Evan. 225</l>
<l>10                   Paul. 71</l>
<l>26                   Apoc. 36</l>
<l>Imp. Priv. Libr. 7972      Evan. 829</l>
<l>Imp. Gr. Theol. 19,</l>
<l>79-80, 90, 95, 122       Evann. 824-8</l>
<l>141                      Act. 335</l>
<l>150                      Act. 415</l>
<l>157                      Paul. 373</l>
<l>Imp. Gr. Theol. (<hi rend='italic'>cont.</hi>)&mdash;</l>
<l>69, 163, 220             Apoc. 136-8</l>
<l>Rainer 1, Rainer</l>
<l>2                    Evst. 502-3</l>
<l>209                    Evst. 180</l>
<l>308                    Apost. 200</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Wolfenbüttel</hi>        Evan. O<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>                         6</l>
<l>Carolin. A, B            Evann. P, Q</l>
<l>xvi. 7                   Act. 69</l>
<l>xvi. 16                  Evan. 126</l>
<l>Gud. gr. 104. 2          Act. 97</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Zittau</hi>                     Evan. 605                           1
</p>

<p>
GREECE.
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Athens</hi>                                                185</l>
<l>Nat. 3                   Evst. 804</l>
<l>5                   Evst. 828</l>
<l>10 ?                Evst. 829</l>
<l>Nat. Sakkel. 58, 76, 93,</l>
<l>80, 127, 121, 110, 81,</l>
<l>71, 87, 118, 125, 108,</l>
<l>74, 134, 95, 77, 107,</l>
<l>75, 122, 109, 160,</l>
<l>111, 137, 117, 65,</l>
<l>130, 99, 88                   Evann. 775-803</l>
<l>150 (12), 151 (13),</l>
<l>152 (14), 153 (15),</l>
<l>154 (16)                      Evann. 846-50</l>
<l>155 (17)                      Evan. 852</l>
<l>156 (18), 157 (19),</l>
<l>158 (20), 159 (21),</l>
<l>160 (22), 161 (23)            Evann. 854-9</l>
<l>162 (24), 203 (16)            Evann. 862-3</l>
<l>489 (216), 56, 57             Evann. 867-9</l>
<l>13, 139, 347                  Evann. 1145-7</l>
<l>111                           Evan. 1272</l>
<l>72, 92, 113, 123, 128,</l>
<l>132, 135                      Evann. 1313-9</l>
<l>207 (70), 208 (71),</l>
<l>209 (72), 43 (149 ?),</l>
<l>45, 64 (91), 66 (105),</l>
<l>221 (129), 119, 89            Act. 304-13</l>
<l>(490, 217)                    Act. 201</l>
<l>69 (100), 100 (96)            Paul. 382-3</l>
<l>259                           Paul. 471</l>
<l>Nat. Libr. 163, 164,</l>
<l>165, 166, 167, 168,</l>
<l>169                           Evst. 518-24</l>
<l>170, 171, 172, 173,</l>
<l>174                           Evst. 528-32</l>
<l>175, 176, ?, 177, 178         Evst. 534-8</l>
<l>179, 180, 181, 182            Evst. 541-4</l>
<l>183                           Evst. 546</l>
<l>184, 185                      Evst. 549-50</l>
<l>186, 187                      Evst. 552-3</l>
<l>188                           Evst. 556</l>
<l>189, 190                      Evst. 560-1</l>
<pb n='400'/><anchor id='Pg400'/>
<l>191, 192, 193, 194,</l>
<l>195, 196, 197, 198,</l>
<l>199, 200, 201, 202             Evst. 563-74</l>
<l>66 ?, 70 ?, 146 ?, 64 ?,</l>
<l>82, 68 ?, 79, 73, 67 ?,</l>
<l>112 ?, 670 ?, 126, 69,</l>
<l>63 ?, 86, ?, ?, 84 ?,</l>
<l>661 ?, 85 ?, 124, 62 ?         Evst. 429-49</l>
<l>4                              Evst. 759</l>
<l>60, 78, 83, 97, 126,</l>
<l>143, 147, 148, 668,</l>
<l>685, 700, 707, 750,</l>
<l>757, 759, 760, 766,</l>
<l>769, 784, 786, 795             Evst. 943-63</l>
<l>203, 206                       Apost. 204-5</l>
<l>115, and 3 others              Apost. 209-12</l>
<l>101, 102, 106, 133,</l>
<l>144                            Apost. 270-4</l>
<l>103                            Apost. 37</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Τῆς Βουλῆς            Evann. 804-7, Evst. 450, Apoc. 141</l>
<l>Mamoukae                         Evann. 808-9</l>
<l>Οἰκονόμου 6           Evan. 810</l>
<l>Soc. Archaeol. Christ.           Evan. 811</l>
<l>M. Bournias                      Evst. 451-2<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi></l>
<l>M. Varouccas                     Evst. 453, Evst. 462</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Corfu</hi>                                                  11</l>
<l>Corfu                            Evann. 812-16</l>
<l>Abp. Eustathius                  Evst. 466-8</l>
<l>M. Eleutherius                   Evst. 459-61</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Zante</hi>                       Act. 314                   1</l>
</lg>

<p>
HOLLAND.
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Leyden</hi> 66                          Paul. 350                     6</l>
<l>74                   Evan. 79</l>
<l>77                   Act. 38</l>
<l>74 A                 Evan. 122</l>
<l>Gronovii 131                     Evan. 435</l>
<l>Scaligeri 243                    Evst. 6</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Utrecht</hi>                            Evan. F                       1
</p>

<p>
ITALY.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Bologna&mdash;</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Royal Library</hi>                                          2
</p>

<lg>
<l>Bibl. Univ. 2775                 Evan. 204</l>
<l>3638                 Evst. 160</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Cortona</hi> 301              Evan. 1260                     1</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Ferrara&mdash;</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Municipal Library</hi>                                      2
</p>

<lg>
<l>119, N. A. 4           Evan. 450</l>
<l>187, N. A. 7           Evan. 451</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Florence&mdash;</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Grand Ducal Library</hi>          55
</p>

<lg>
<l>Laurent, iv. 1         Act. 84</l>
<l>iv. 5         Act. 85</l>
<l>iv. 20        Act. 86</l>
<l>iv. 29        Act. 87</l>
<l>iv. 30        Act. 147</l>
<l>iv. 31        Act. 88</l>
<l>iv. 32        Act. 89</l>
<l>vi. 2         Evst. 113</l>
<l>vi. 5         Evan. 832</l>
<l>vi. 7         Evst. 114</l>
<l>vi. 11        Evan. 182</l>
<l>vi. 13        Evan. 363</l>
<l>vi. 14        Evan. 183</l>
<l>vi. 15        Evan. 184</l>
<l>vi. 16        Evan. 185</l>
<l>vi. 18        Evan. 186</l>
<l>vi. 21        Evst. 115</l>
<l>vi. 23        Evan. 187</l>
<l>vi. 24        Evan. 364</l>
<l>vi. 25        Evan. 188</l>
<l>vi. 26        Evan. 833</l>
<l>vi. 27        Evan. 189</l>
<l>vi. 28        Evan. 190</l>
<l>vi. 29        Evan. 191</l>
<l>vi. 30        Evan. 192</l>
<l>vi. 31        Evst. 116</l>
<l>vi. 32        Evan. 193</l>
<l>vi. 33        Evan. 194</l>
<l>vi. 34        Evan. 195</l>
<l>vi. 36        Evan. 365</l>
<l>vii. 9         Apoc. 77</l>
<l>vii. 29        Apoc. 145</l>
<l>viii. 12        Evan. 196</l>
<l>viii. 14        Evan. 197</l>
<l>x. 4         Paul. 100</l>
<l>x. 6         Paul. 101</l>
<l>x. 7         Paul. 102</l>
<l>x. 19        Paul. 103</l>
<l>xi. 6         Evan. 834</l>
<l>xi. 8         Evan. 835</l>
<l>xi. 18        Evan. 836</l>
</lg>

<p>
Aedil. 221             Evan. 198
</p>

<lg>
<l>Med. Pal. 243          Evst. 118</l>
<l>244          Evst. 117</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laurent. Conv. Soppr.</l>
<l>24          Apost. 4</l>
<l>53          Evan. 367</l>
<l>150          Act. 149</l>
<l>159          Evan. 200</l>
<l>160          Evan. 199</l>
<l>171          Evan. 366</l>
<l>176          Evan. 362</l>
<l>191          Act. 148</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laurent. Gaddianus</l>
<l>124          Evst. 510</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laurent. St. Mark</l>
<l>704          Apost. 223</l>
<l>706          Evst. 187</l>
</lg>

<pb n='401'/><anchor id='Pg401'/>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Libreria Riccardi</hi>                               5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>5                   Evan. 370</l>
<l>69                   Evst. 511</l>
<l>84                   Evan. 368</l>
<l>85                   Paul. 226</l>
<l>90                   Evan. 369</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Messina</hi>                                     21
</p>

<lg>
<l>Univ. Libr. 18            Evan. 420</l>
<l>40                  Act. 241</l>
<l>88, 100             Evann. 630-1</l>
<l>93                  Apost. 82</l>
<l>99                  Apoc. 113</l>
<l>65, 66, 75, 96, 98,</l>
<l>73, 58, 94, 111,</l>
<l>112, 170, 95,</l>
<l>150                Evst. 300-12</l>
<l>175                  Evst. 525</l>
<l>St. Basil 104              Act. 175</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Milan&mdash;</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ambrosian Library</hi>                              46
</p>

<lg>
<l>A. 51 sup. or 15           Paul. 172</l>
<l>A. 62 inf.                 Paul. 390</l>
<l>A. 152 sup.                Evst. 167</l>
<l>A. 241 inf.                Paul. 287</l>
<l>B. 6 inf.                  Paul. 171</l>
<l>B. 56                      Evan. 348</l>
<l>B. 62                      Evan. 350</l>
<l>B. 70 sup.                 Evan. 351</l>
<l>B. 93                      Evan. 352</l>
<l>C. 16                      Evst. 81</l>
<l>C. 63 sup.                 Apost. 46</l>
<l>C. 91 sup.                 Evst. 106</l>
<l>C. 160 sup.                Evst. 168</l>
<l>C. 295 inf.                Paul. 289</l>
<l>D. 67 sup.                 Evst. 103</l>
<l>D. 72 sup.                 Evst. 104</l>
<l>D. 108 sup.                Evst. 166</l>
<l>D. 161 inf.                Evan. 458</l>
<l>D. 282 inf.                Evan. 459</l>
<l>D. 298 inf                 Evan. 460</l>
<l>D. 541 inf                 Paul. 288</l>
<l>E. 2 inf.                  Paul. 286</l>
<l>E. 63 sup.                 Evan. 457</l>
<l>E. 97 sup.                 Act. 137</l>
<l>E. 101 sup.                Evst. 480</l>
<l>E. 102 sup.                Act. 138</l>
<l>E. 295                     Paul. 391</l>
<l>F. 61 sup.                 Evan. 349</l>
<l>F. 125 sup.                Paul. 175</l>
<l>G. 16 sup.                 Evan. 344</l>
<l>H. 13 sup.                 Evan. 343</l>
<l>H. 104 sup.                Act. 139</l>
<l>L. 79 sup.                 Evst. 163</l>
<l>M. 48 sup.                 Evan. 456</l>
<l>M. 81 sup.                 Evst. 105</l>
<l>M. 93                      Evan. 353</l>
<l>N. 272 sup.                Paul. 225</l>
<l>P. 274 sup.                Evst. 169</l>
<l>S. 23 sup.                 Evan. 346</l>
<l>S. 62 sup.                 Evst. 102</l>
<l>Z. 34 sup.                 Evan. 461</l>
<l>E. S. iii. 13              Evst. 165</l>
<l>E. S. iv. 14               Evst. 164, and Evan. 837</l>
<l>17               Evan. 345</l>
<l>35               Evan. 347</l>
<l>Formerly Hoeplii           Evan. 838</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Modena</hi>                                    16
</p>

<lg>
<l>Este ii. A. 1              Evan. 454</l>
<l>ii. A. 5              Evan. 455</l>
<l>ii. A. 9              Evan. 358</l>
<l>ii. A. 13             Act. 195</l>
<l>ii. A. 14             Paul. 177</l>
<l>iii. B. 17            Act. 142</l>
<l>ii. C. 4              Act. 196</l>
<l>ii. C. 6              Evst. 111</l>
<l>ii. D. 3              Apost. 50</l>
<l>ii. G. 3              Act. H</l>
<l>                      Also Act. 112</l>
<l>iii. B. 16            Evan. 359</l>
<l>iii. B. 17            Act. 142</l>
<l>iii. F. 13            Evan. 839</l>
<l>G. 9                  Evan. 842</l>
<l>iii. E. 1             Apoc. 147</l>
<l>iii. F. 12            Apoc. 148</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Naples</hi>                                      12
</p>

<lg>
<l>I. B. 14                  Evst. 138</l>
<l>II. AA. 3                 Evan. 401</l>
<l>4                 Evan. 403</l>
<l>5                 Evan. 402</l>
<l>7                 Act. 83</l>
<l>8                 Act. 173</l>
<l>9                 Act. 174</l>
<l>37                 Evan. 843</l>
<l>II. B. 23, 24             Paul. 394-5</l>
<l>II. C. 15                 Evan. R or W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi></l>
<l>Scotti                    Evan. 404</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Padua</hi>, Univ. 695     Evan. 844.              1
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Palermo</hi>, I. E. 11    Paul. 217.              1
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Parma</hi>                                        6
</p>

<lg>
<l>Reg. 5                    Evan. 452</l>
<l>14                    Evst. 161</l>
<l>15                    Evan. 831</l>
<l>95                    Evan. 453</l>
<l>1821                    Evan. 361</l>
<l>2319                    Evan. 360</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Pistoia</hi>, Fabr. Libr. 307  Evan. 845          2</l>
<l>                                      Evst. 526</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Rome&mdash;</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Vatican</hi>                                       213
</p>

<lg>
<l>Vat. Gr. 54                    Evst. 924</l>
<l>163                    Evan 177</l>
<l>165                    Paul. 58</l>
<l>349                    Evan. 127</l>
<l>350                    Evst. 539</l>
<l>351                    Evst. 35</l>
<l>352, 353               Evst. 376-7</l>
<l>354                    Evan. S</l>
<pb n='402'/><anchor id='Pg402'/>
<l>355            Evst. 378</l>
<l>356            Evan. 128</l>
<l>357            Evst. 379</l>
<l>358            Evan. 129</l>
<l>359            Evan. 130</l>
<l>360            Evan. 131</l>
<l>361            Evan. 132</l>
<l>362            Evst. 380</l>
<l>363            Evan. 133</l>
<l>364            Evan. 134</l>
<l>365            Evan. 135</l>
<l>366            Act. 72</l>
<l>367            Act. 73</l>
<l>368            Apost. 116</l>
<l>370            Apoc. 152</l>
<l>540            Evst. 381</l>
<l>542            Apoc. 114</l>
<l>549            Paul. 305</l>
<l>551            Paul. 307</l>
<l>552            Paul. 308</l>
<l>579            Apoc. 38</l>
<l>643, 644, 645        Evann. 668-70</l>
<l>646            Paul. 310</l>
<l>647            Evan. 671</l>
<l>648            Paul. 312</l>
<l>652            Act. 239</l>
<l>665            Evan. 136</l>
<l>692            Paul. 314</l>
<l>756            Evan. 137</l>
<l>757            Evan. 138</l>
<l>758            Evan. 139</l>
<l>760            Act. 74</l>
<l>761            Paul. 81</l>
<l>762            Paul. 82</l>
<l>765            Paul. 83</l>
<l>766            Paul. 84</l>
<l>774            Evan. 860</l>
<l>781            Evst. 382</l>
<l>1067            Evst. 36</l>
<l>1090            Evan. 674</l>
<l>1136            Paul. 85</l>
<l>1155            Evst. 119</l>
<l>1156<note place='foot'>So Scholz's index, and we may suppose correctly,
but in his Catalogue of Evangelistaria he
numbers it 1256.</note>         Evst. 120</l>
<l>1157            Evst. 121</l>
<l>1158            Evan. 140</l>
<l>1159            Evan. 371</l>
<l>1160            Evan. 141</l>
<l>1161            Evan. 372</l>
<l>1168            Evst. 122</l>
<l>1190            Apoc. 154</l>
<l>1191            Evan. 675</l>
<l>1208            Act. 246</l>
<l>1209            B</l>
<l>1210            Evan. 142</l>
<l>1217            Evst. 547</l>
<l>1221            Evan. 676</l>
<l>1222            Paul. 315</l>
<l>1228            Evst. 548</l>
<l>1229            Evan. 143</l>
<l>1253            Evan. 864</l>
<l>1254            Evan. 144</l>
<l>1270            Act. 154</l>
<l>1423            Evan. 373</l>
<l>1426            Act. 264</l>
<l>1430            Act. 155</l>
<l>1445            Evan. 374</l>
<l>1472            Evan. 865</l>
<l>1522            Evst. 123</l>
<l>1528            Apost. 38</l>
<l>1533            Evan. 375</l>
<l>1534            Evst. 383</l>
<l>1539            Evan. 376</l>
<l>1548            Evan. 145</l>
<l>1618            Evan. 377</l>
<l>1625            Evst. 551</l>
<l>1641            Evst. 384</l>
<l>1649            Paul. 189</l>
<l>1650            Act. 156</l>
<l>1658            Evan. 378</l>
<l>1670            Paul. M</l>
<l>1714            Act. 157</l>
<l>1743            Apoc. 67</l>
<l>1761            Act. 158</l>
<l>1769            Evan. 379</l>
<l>1813            Evst. 385</l>
<l>1882            Evan. 866</l>
<l>1886            Evst. 386</l>
<l>1895            Evan. 680</l>
<l>1904            Apoc. 68</l>
<l>1933            Evan. 683</l>
<l>1968            Act. 159</l>
<l>1971            Act. 334</l>
<l>1976            Apoc. 116</l>
<l>1973, 1978        Evst. 554-5</l>
<l>1983            Evan. 173</l>
<l>1988            Evst. 124</l>
<l>1996            Evan. 684</l>
<l>2002            Evan. 174</l>
<l>2012            Evst. 387</l>
<l>2017            Evst. 125</l>
<l>2041            Evst. 126</l>
<l>2051, 2052           Evst. 557-8</l>
<l>2061            Act. ב, Paul. ב, and Evst. 559</l>
<l>2062            Act. 160</l>
<l>2063            Evst. 127</l>
<l>2066            Apoc. B</l>
<l>2068            Apost. 49</l>
<l>2070            Evan. 382</l>
<l>2080            Evan. 175</l>
<l>2099            Act. 256</l>
<l>2100            Evst. 388</l>
<l>2113            Evan. 176</l>
<l>2115            Evan. 870</l>
<l>2116            Apost. 119</l>
<l>2117            Evan. 687</l>
<l>2129            Apoc. 158 and Evst. 389</l>
<l>2133            Evst. 128</l>
<l>2138            Evst. 562</l>
<pb n='403'/><anchor id='Pg403'/>
<l>2139      Evan. 380</l>
<l>2144      Evst. 390</l>
<l>2160      Evan. 690</l>
<l>2165      Evan. 689</l>
<l>2167      Evst. 392</l>
<l>2180      Paul. 323</l>
<l>2187      Evan. 691</l>
<l>2247      Evan. 692</l>
<l>2251      Evst. 393</l>
<l>2275      Evan. 693</l>
<l>2290      Evan. 694</l>
<l>3785      Evan. N</l>
<l>Vat. Alex. Gr.</l>
<l>3      Evan. 696</l>
<l>4      Paul. 324</l>
<l>5      Evan. 697</l>
<l>9      Evan. 699</l>
<l>11      Apost. 120</l>
<l>12      Evst. 129</l>
<l>28      Evan. 154</l>
<l>29      Act. 78</l>
<l>33      Evst. 188</l>
<l>44, 59      Evst. 394-5</l>
<l>68      Apoc. 41</l>
<l>70      Apost. 122</l>
<l>79      Evan. 155</l>
<l>179      Act. 40</l>
<l>189      Evan. 156</l>
<l>Vat. Ottob. Gr.</l>
<l>2      Evst. 130</l>
<l>17      Paul. 405</l>
<l>31      Paul. 195</l>
<l>37      Evan. 703</l>
<l>61      Paul. 196</l>
<l>66      Evan. 386</l>
<l>74      Paul. 326</l>
<l>100      Evan. 704</l>
<l>154      Apoc. 159</l>
<l>175      Evst. 131</l>
<l>176      Paul. 197</l>
<l>204      Evan. 387</l>
<l>208      Evan. 705</l>
<l>212      Evan. 388</l>
<l>258      Act. 161</l>
<l>283      Apoc. 118</l>
<l>297      Evan. 389</l>
<l>298      Act. 162</l>
<l>325      Act. 163</l>
<l>326      Evst. 132</l>
<l>356      Paul. 202</l>
<l>381      Evan. 390</l>
<l>416      Evst. 133</l>
<l>417      Act. 165</l>
<l>432      Evan. 391</l>
<l>444      Evst. 396</l>
<l>453, 454, 456      Evann. 707-9</l>
<l>Vat. Palat. Gr.</l>
<l>5      Evan. 146</l>
<l>10      Paul. 327</l>
<l>20      Evan. 381</l>
<l>32      Evan. 713</l>
<l>38      Act. 247</l>
<l>89      Evan. 147</l>
<l>136      Evan. 148</l>
<l>171      Evan. 149</l>
<l>189      Evan. 150</l>
<l>204      Paul. 328</l>
<l>208      Evan. 714</l>
<l>220      Evan. 151</l>
<l>227      Evan. 152</l>
<l>229      Evan. 153</l>
<l>1. A, 221, 239      Evst. 397-9</l>
<l>241      Apost. 123</l>
<l>346      Apoc. 119</l>
<l>423      Paul. 330</l>
<l>Pio-Vat. Gr.  50       Act. 80</l>
<l>              55       Evan. 158</l>
<l>Vat. Urb.  2      Evan. 157</l>
<l>3      Act. 79</l>
<l>4      Evan. 1269</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Rom. Angelica</hi>         8
</p>

<lg>
<l>A. 1. 5        Evan. 178</l>
<l>A. 2. 15       Act. L</l>
<l>A. 4. 1        Apoc. 120</l>
<l>A. 4. 11       Evan. 179</l>
<l>B. 1. 5        Evan. 723</l>
<l>B. 5. 15       Apoc. 121</l>
<l>D. ii. 27      Evst. 527</l>
<l>D. 3. 8        Evan. 611</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Rom. Barberini</hi>           34
</p>

<lg>
<l>iii. 6          Evan. 167</l>
<l>iii. 17         Evan. 161</l>
<l>iii. 38         Evan. 164</l>
<l>iii. 45         Apost. 40</l>
<l>iii. 131        Evan. 166</l>
<l>iv. 11, iv. 60, iv. 84      Apost. 125-7</l>
<l>iv. 27          Evan. 160</l>
<l>iv. 28          Evst. 533</l>
<l>iv. 31          Evan. 162</l>
<l>iv. 43, iv. 30, iv. 53,</l>
<l>iv. 13, iv. 25, iv. 1,</l>
<l>iii. 22, iii. 129, vi.</l>
<l>18                      Evst. 403-11</l>
<l>iv. 54                  Evst. 135-6</l>
<l>iv. 56                  Apoc. 43</l>
<l>iv. 64                  Evan. 159</l>
<l>iv. 85                  Paul. 213</l>
<l>iv. 86, 77              Evann. 729-30</l>
<l>v. 16                   Evan. 163</l>
<l>v. 17                   Evann. Y &amp; 392</l>
<l>v. 37                   Evan. 165</l>
<l>vi. 4                   Evst. 134</l>
<l>vi. 9                   Evan. 168</l>
<l>vi. 13                  Paul. 297</l>
<l>vi. 21                  Act. 81</l>
<l>No mark                 Apost. 41</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Rom. Propaganda</hi>           6
</p>

<lg>
<l>?      Evann. T &amp; T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi></l>
<l>L. vi. 6      Evst. 37</l>
<l>9      Evan. 851</l>
<l>10      Evan. 732</l>
<l>19      Evan. 180</l>
</lg>

<pb n='404'/><anchor id='Pg404'/>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Rom. Casanatensis</hi>        4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>G. ii. 6        Act. 261</l>
<l>G. ii. 9        Evan. 853</l>
<l>G. iv. 1        Evan. 395</l>
<l>G. v. 7         Paul. 397</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Collegii Romani</hi>          5
</p>

<lg>
<l>Evann. 383-5</l>
<l>Act. 171-2.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Rom. Corsini</hi>        2
</p>

<lg>
<l>41 G. 16       Evan. 883</l>
<l>41 E. 37       Apoc. 73</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Rom. Crypta Ferrata</hi>        64</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Α. α. 1-6                          Evann. 622-7</l>
<l>Α. α. 8, 17                        Evann. 628-9</l>
<l>Α'. α᾽., 1, Α. β. 1, Α. β.</l>
<l>3, Α. β. 6                         Act. 242-5</l>
<l>Α. α. 7, Α. α. 9, Α. α.</l>
<l>10, Α. α. 11, Α. α. 12,</l>
<l>Α. α. 13, Α. α. 14, Α.</l>
<l>α. 15, Α. α. 16, Α. β.</l>
<l>2, Α. δ. 2                         Evst. 313-23</l>
<l>Α. δ. 4                            Evst. 325</l>
<l>Α. δ. 11, Α. δ. 16, Α. δ.</l>
<l>17, Α. δ. 19, Α. δ. 20,</l>
<l>Α. δ. 21, Α. δ. 22, Α.</l>
<l>δ. 24 (q. v.), Γ. α. 18,</l>
<l>Γ. β. 2, Γ. β. 3, Γ. β.</l>
<l>6, Γ. β. 7, Γ. β. 8, Γ.</l>
<l>β. 9, Γ. β. 11, Γ. β.</l>
<l>12, Γ. β. 13, Γ. β. 14,</l>
<l>Γ. β. 15, Γ. β. 17, Γ.</l>
<l>β. 18, Γ. β. 19, Γ. β.</l>
<l>23, Γ. β. 24, Γ. β. 35,</l>
<l>Γ. β. 38, Γ. β. 13,  Δ.</l>
<l>β. 22, Δ. γ. 26, Δ.</l>
<l>δ. 6                                     Evst. 330-60</l>
<l>Α. β. 4, Α. β. 5, Α. β. 7,</l>
<l>Α. β. 8, Α. β. 9, Α. β.</l>
<l>10, Α. β. 11                       Apost. 83-9</l>
<l>Α. δ. 24                           Apost. 263</l>
<l>Fragment                                          Paul. R, Evst.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Rom. Ghigian</hi>        7
</p>

<lg>
<l>R. iv. 6          Evan. 396</l>
<l>R. iv. 8          Apoc. 72</l>
<l>R. v. 29          Act. 169</l>
<l>R. v. 32          Paul. 207</l>
<l>R. v. 33          Apoc. 122</l>
<l>R. vii. 52        Evst. 414</l>
<l>R. viii. 55       Paul. 208</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Rom. Malatestian.</hi>        2
</p>

<lg>
<l>xxvii. 4       Evst. 144</l>
<l>xxix. 2        Evst. 145</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Rom. Vallicell.</hi>         14
</p>

<lg>
<l>B. 86         Act. 166</l>
<l>B. 133        Evan. 169</l>
<l>C. 4          Evan. 397</l>
<l>C. 7          Evst. 545</l>
<l>C. 46         Apost. 42</l>
<l>C. 61         Evan. 170</l>
<l>C. 73         Evan. 171</l>
<l>D. 20         Apoc. 21</l>
<l>[(missing) D. 4. 1       Evst. 156]</l>
<l>D. 63         Evst. 137</l>
<l>E. 22         Evan. 393</l>
<l>E. 40         Evan. 617</l>
<l>F. 13         Act. 168</l>
<l>F. 17         Evan. 394</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Rossano</hi>       1
</p>

<p>
Evan. Σ
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Siena</hi>           1
</p>

<p>
Univ. X. iv. 1        Evst. 162
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Syracuse</hi>            5
</p>

<lg>
<l>Evan. 421</l>
<l>Evan. 1144</l>
<l>Seminario      Evst. 362</l>
<l>Evst. 486</l>
<l>Apost. 113</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Turin</hi>        18
</p>

<lg>
<l>Univ. B. 1. 9         Evan. 333</l>
<l>B. ii. 17       Evan. 336</l>
<l>B. iii. 2       Evan. 335</l>
<l>B. iii. 8       Evan. 334</l>
<l>B. iii. 25      Evan. 337</l>
<l>B. v. 4         Evan. 342</l>
<l>B. v. 8         Evan. 339</l>
<l>B. v. 19        Act. 134</l>
<l>B. vii. 6       Evan. 340</l>
<l>B. vii. 14      Evan. 341</l>
<l>B. vii. 33      Evan. 338</l>
<l>C. ii. 4        Evan. 332</l>
<l>C. ii. 5        Evan. 398</l>
<l>C. ii. 14       Evan. 399</l>
<l>C. v. 1         Act. 136</l>
<l>C. v. 10        Paul. 168</l>
<l>C. vi. 19       Act. 133</l>
<l>C. vi. 29       Paul. 165</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Venice</hi>        89
</p>

<lg>
<l>St. Lazarus 1531          Evan. 470</l>
<l>1631          Evst. 576</l>
<l>Ven. Marc. i. 40          Apoc. 162</l>
<l>i. 57          Evan. 465</l>
<l>i. 58          Evan. 462</l>
<l>i. 59          Evan. 464</l>
<l>ii. 7          Evan. 463</l>
<l>ii. 54         Apoc. 163</l>
<l>ii. 61         Act. 147</l>
<l>ii. 114        Act. 332</l>
<l>ii. 17  }      Evst. 478-9</l>
<l>ii. 143 }</l>
<l>ii. 188        Evst. 498</l>
<l>ii. 130        Evst. 931</l>
<l>ii. 115        Apost. 198</l>
<l>ii. 128        Apost. 114</l>
<l>S. Marc. 5                Evan. 205</l>
<l>6                Evan. 206</l>
<l>8                Evan. 207</l>
<l>9                Evan. 208</l>
<l>10               Evan. 209</l>
<pb n='405'/><anchor id='Pg405'/>
<l>11              Act. 96</l>
<l>12              Evst. 139</l>
<l>26              Evan. 888</l>
<l>27              Evan. 210</l>
<l>28              Evan. 357</l>
<l>29              Evan. 354</l>
<l>30, 31, 32      Evann. 889-91</l>
<l>33              Paul. 110</l>
<l>34              Paul. 111</l>
<l>35              Paul. 112</l>
<l>36              Paul. 408</l>
<l>61, 144         Evann. 893-4</l>
<l>494             Evan. 466</l>
<l>495             Evan. 467</l>
<l>539             Evan. 211</l>
<l>540             Evan. 212</l>
<l>541             Evan. 355</l>
<l>542             Evan. 213</l>
<l>543             Evan. 214</l>
<l>544             Evan. 215</l>
<l>545             Evan. 356</l>
<l>546             Act. 140</l>
<l>548             Evst. 107</l>
<l>549             Evst. 108</l>
<l>550             Evst. 109</l>
<l>551             Evst. 110</l>
<l>Nanian. 1. 8         Evan. U</l>
<l>1. 9         Evst. 141</l>
<l>1. 10        Evan. 405</l>
<l>1. 11        Evan. 406</l>
<l>1. 12        Evan. 407</l>
<l>1. 14        Evan. 408</l>
<l>1. 15        Evan. 409</l>
<l>1. 17        Evan. 410</l>
<l>1. 18        Evan. 411</l>
<l>1. 19        Evan. 412</l>
<l>1. 20        Evan. 413</l>
<l>1. 21        Evan. 414</l>
<l>1. 22        Evan. 415</l>
<l>1. 23        Evst. 142</l>
<l>1. 24        Evan. 416</l>
<l>1. 25        Evan. 417</l>
<l>1. 28        Evan. 418</l>
<l>1. 34        Evan. 463</l>
<l>1. 45        Evst. 171</l>
<l>1. 46        Evst. 172</l>
<l>1. 47        Evst. 173</l>
<l>1. 48        Evst. 174</l>
<l>1. 49        Evst. 175</l>
<l>1. 50        Evst. 176</l>
<l>1. 51        Evst. 177</l>
<l>1. 52        Evst. 178</l>
<l>Ven. Mark Gr.</l>
<l>1. 3         Evan. 217</l>
<l>1. 4         Evst. 170</l>
<l>1. 56        Evan. 468</l>
<l>1. 57        Evan. 465</l>
<l>1. 58        Evan. 462</l>
<l>1. 59        Evan. 464</l>
<l>1. 60        Evan. 419</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Treasury of St. Mark's Church.</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>Ven. Thesaur. 1. 53      Evst. 181</l>
<l>1. 54      Evst. 182</l>
<l>1. 55      Evst. 183</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Church of S. Giorgio di Greco.</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>Α᾽        Evst. 184</l>
<l>Γ᾽        Evst. 185</l>
<l>Β᾽         Evst. 186</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Verona</hi>           1
</p>

<p>
Psalter        Evan. O<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>c</hi>
</p>

<p>
PALESTINE.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Jerusalem</hi>         42
</p>

<lg>
<l>Holy Cross  1        Act. 324</l>
<l>6        Evst. 797</l>
<l>46       Evan. 663</l>
<l>Holy Sepulc. 2, 5, 6, 14,</l>
<l>17, 31, 32, 33, 40, 41,</l>
<l>43, 44, 45, 46             Evann. 649-62</l>
<l>7, 15                      Act. 257-8</l>
<l>12                         Evst. 143</l>
<l>Patr. Libr. 28                  Evan. 1149</l>
<l>31, 37, 41                   Evann. 1261-3</l>
<l>42, 46, 47, 48               Evann. 1265-8</l>
<l>38, 43                       Act. 416-7</l>
<l>49, 56, 59, 60, 62, 139      Evann. 1274-9</l>
<l>33                           Evst. 923</l>
<l>105                          Evst. 925</l>
<l>161, 526                     Evst. 927-8</l>
<l>462                          Act. 330</l>
<l>530                          Evst. 932</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>St. Saba</hi>                34
</p>

<lg>
<l>27, 52          Evann. 664-5</l>
<l>54              Evan. 673</l>
<l>56, 57, 58      Evann. 677-9</l>
<l>59, 60          Evann. 681-2</l>
<l>61 <hi rend='italic'>a</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>b</hi>      Evann. 685-6</l>
<l>61 <hi rend='italic'>c</hi>            Evan. 688</l>
<l>61 <hi rend='italic'>d</hi>            Evan. 695</l>
<l>61 <hi rend='italic'>e</hi>, 62 <hi rend='italic'>a</hi>, 62 <hi rend='italic'>b</hi>      Evann. 700-2</l>
<l>62 <hi rend='italic'>c</hi>            Evan. 706</l>
<l>62 <hi rend='italic'>d</hi>, 62 <hi rend='italic'>e</hi>      Evann. 710-1</l>
<l>Tower Libr. 12                  Evst. 361</l>
<l>16, 52              Evst. 364-5</l>
<l>17, 23, 24          Evst. 147-9</l>
<l>20, 35              Act. 301-2</l>
<l>25, 26, 40, 44      Evst. 326-9</l>
<l>41                  Paul. 417</l>
<l>45                  Evan. 712</l>
<l>46, 47              Evann. 715-6</l>
</lg>

<pb n='406'/><anchor id='Pg406'/>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Sinai</hi>      184</l>
<l>148, 149, 150, 151, 152,</l>
<l>153, 154, 155, 156,</l>
<l>157, 158, 159, 160,</l>
<l>161, 162, 163, 164,</l>
<l>165, 166, 167, 168,</l>
<l>169, 170, 171, 172,</l>
<l>173, 174, 175, 176,</l>
<l>177, 178, 179, 180,</l>
<l>181, 182, 183, 184,</l>
<l>185, 186, 187, 188,</l>
<l>189, 190, 191, 192,</l>
<l>193, 194, 195, 196,</l>
<l>197, 198, 199, 200,</l>
<l>201, 203, 259, 260,</l>
<l>261, 262, 263, 264,</l>
<l>265, 266, 267, 268,</l>
<l>269, 270, 302, 303,</l>
<l>304, 305, 306            Evann.      1185-1256</l>
<l>274, 275, 276, 277, 278,</l>
<l>279, 280, 281, 282,</l>
<l>283, 284, 285, 287,</l>
<l>288, 289, 290, 291,</l>
<l>292, 293, 300, 301       Act. 394-414</l>
</lg>

<p>
Golden      Evst. 286
</p>

<lg>
<l>Sinaiticus, Λ. 1      Evst. 493</l>
<l>205, 206, 207, 208, 209,</l>
<l>210, 211, 212, 213,</l>
<l>214, 215, 216, 217,</l>
<l>218, 219, 220, 221,</l>
<l>222, 223, 224, 225,</l>
<l>226, 227, 228, 229,</l>
<l>230, 231, 232, 233,</l>
<l>234, 235, 236, 237,</l>
<l>238, 239, 240, 241,</l>
<l>242, 243, 244, 245,</l>
<l>246, 247, 248, 249,</l>
<l>250, 251, 252, 253,</l>
<l>254, 255, 256, 257,</l>
<l>258, 271, 272, 273,</l>
<l>550, 659, 720, 738,</l>
<l>748, 754, 756, 775,</l>
<l>796, 797, 800, 929,</l>
<l>943, 957, 960, 961,</l>
<l>962, 965, 968, 972,</l>
<l>973, 977, 981, 982,</l>
<l>986, 1042                Evst. 839-921</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>296, 297, 298, 299      Apost. 165-8</l>
<l>294                     Apost. 174</l>
<l>295                     Apost. 213</l>
</lg>

<p>
RUSSIA.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Moscow</hi>                        45
</p>

<lg>
<l>Syn. 4      Apost. 13</l>
<l>5      Act. 99</l>
<l>42      Evan. 237</l>
<l>43      Evst. 47</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Syn.  44      Evst. 48</l>
<l>45      Evan. 259</l>
<l>47      Evan. 239</l>
<l>48      Evan. 238</l>
<l>49      Evan. 240</l>
<l>61      Paul. N<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>c</hi> or O</l>
<l>67      Apoc. 49</l>
<l>94      Evan. 249</l>
<l>98      Act. K and 102</l>
<l>99      Paul. 123</l>
<l>120      Evan. O and 257</l>
<l>139      Evan. 255</l>
<l>193      Act. 103</l>
<l>206      Apoc. 50</l>
<l>250      Paul. 124</l>
<l>261      Evan. 246</l>
<l>264      Evan. 248</l>
<l>265      Evan. 245</l>
<l>266      Evst. 52</l>
<l>267      Evst. 53</l>
<l>268      Evst. 54</l>
<l>291      Apost. 14</l>
<l>292      Paul. 119</l>
<l>313      Evst. 465</l>
<l>328      Act. 106</l>
<l>333      Act. 101</l>
<l>334      Act. 100</l>
<l>373      Evan. 247</l>
<l>380      Evan. 242</l>
<l>cista    Evan. V and 250</l>
<l>Fragments      Paul. O<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Typ. Syn. 1 Evan. 244</l>
<l>3        Evan. 256</l>
<l>9        Evst. 51 and 56</l>
<l>11        Evst. 49</l>
<l>12        Evst. 50</l>
<l>13        Evan. 243</l>
<l>31        Apost. 15</l>
<l>47        Evst. 55</l>
</lg>

<p>
University 25   Apoc. 65
</p>

<p>
Tabul. Imp      Evan. 251
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>St. Petersburg</hi>      59
</p>

<lg>
<l>Petropolitanus Sinaiticus Cod. א</l>
<l>Evan. O<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>f</hi></l>
<l>Evan. Π</l>
</lg>

<p>
Porphyrianus      Act. P and Apost.      63
</p>

<p>
Sangermanensis  Paul. E
</p>

<p>
Tischendorf. II Evan. I
</p>

<lg>
<l>Porphyry, Bp.   Evan. T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>, T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>c</hi></l>
<l>Act. 315</l>
<l>Paul. N</l>
<l>Paul. O<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi></l>
<l>Evann. Θ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>, Θ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>c</hi>, Θ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>, Θ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi>, Θ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>f</hi>, Θ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>g</hi>, Θ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>h</hi></l>
<l>21, 35, 36, 37, 40,</l>
<l>43, 55, 69, 80, 84,</l>
<l>37<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>, 112   Evst. 466-77</l>
<l>Act. G</l>
</lg>

<pb n='407'/><anchor id='Pg407'/>

<lg>
<l>Total</l>
<l>Porphyry, Bp. (<hi rend='italic'>cont.</hi>)&mdash;       mss.</l>
<l>St. Paul (Q) papyrus</l>
<l>St. Paul (palimpsest)</l>
</lg>

<p>
Olim Coislin.      Evan. 437
</p>

<lg>
<l>Petropol. (Kiow)      Evan. 481</l>
<l>98           Evan. 474</l>
<l>iv. 13       Evst. 194</l>
<l>vi. 470      Evan. 473</l>
<l>vii. 179     Evst. 195</l>
<l>viii. 80     Apost. 54</l>
<l>ix. 3. 471   Evan. 475</l>
<l>x. 180       Evst. 196</l>
<l>xi. 3. 181   Evst. 197</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Muralt. 10<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>pe</hi>      Evst. 198</l>
<l>38          Apost. 72</l>
<l>38, 49, 40<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>      Apost. 171-3</l>
<l>44          Evst. 191</l>
<l>45<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>      Apost. 183</l>
<l>56, 67, 105      Evann. 878-80</l>
<l>64          Evst. 933</l>
<l>90          Evst. 192</l>
<l>97          Evan. 479</l>
<l>99          Evan. 480</l>
<l>105         Evan. 476</l>
<l>110         Apost. 197</l>
<l>118         Evan. 477</l>
<l>129         Apoc. 103</l>
</lg>

<p>
SPAIN.
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Escurial</hi> i           Evst. 40      29</l>
<l>P. iii. 4          Act. 202</l>
<l>T. iii. 12         Act. 203</l>
<l>T. iii. 17         Paul. 470</l>
<l>Υ. ii. 8   Evan. 233</l>
<l>Φ. iii. 5      Evan. 230</l>
<l>Φ. iii. 6      Evan. 231</l>
<l>Φ. iii. 7      Evan. 232</l>
<l>Χ. iii. 3          Act. 204</l>
<l>Χ. iii. 6          Apoc. 143</l>
<l>Χ. iii. 10         Act. 205</l>
<l>Χ. iii. 12         Evst. 41</l>
<l>Χ. iii. 13         Evst. 42</l>
<l>Χ. iii. 15         Evan. 227</l>
<l>Χ. iii. 16         Evst. 43</l>
<l>Χ. iv. 2           Act. 206</l>
<l>Χ. iv. 9           Apost. 214</l>
<l>Χ. iv. 12          Evan. 228</l>
<l>Χ. iv. 15          Paul. 384</l>
<l>Χ. iv. 17          Evan. 226</l>
<l>Χ. iv. 21          Evan. 229</l>
<l>Ψ. iii. 2      Paul. 232</l>
<l>Ψ. iii. 6      Act. 207</l>
<l>Ψ. iii. 13, 14      Evann. 818-9</l>
<l>Ψ. iii. 17     Apoc. 85</l>
<l>Ψ. iii. 18     Act. 208</l>
<l>Ω. i. 16     Evan. 820</l>
<l>Ω. iv. 22    Act. 209</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Madrid</hi>, Reg. O. 10, 62      Evann. 821-2      4</l>
<l>O. 78      Act. 316</l>
<l>O. 19 (7)      Apoc. 144</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Toledo</hi> Evst. 455      1
</p>

<p>
SWEDEN.
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Linköping</hi>      1</l>
<l>Benzel 35      Act. 238</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Upsal</hi>      6</l>
<l>Univ. Gr. 1      Act. 68</l>
<l>4       Evan. 613</l>
<l>9       Evan. 614</l>
<l>11      Act. 236</l>
<l>12      Evan. 616</l>
<l>13      Evan. 615</l>
</lg>

<p>
SWITZERLAND.
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Basle</hi>, A. N. iii. 11      Paul 7      9</l>
<l>A. N. iii. 12    Evan. E and Apoc.      15</l>
<l>A. N. iii. 15    Evan.      817</l>
<l>A. N. iv. 1      Evan. 2</l>
<l>A. N. iv. 2      Evan. 1</l>
<l>A. N. iv. 4      Act. 2</l>
<l>A. N. iv. 5      Act. 4</l>
<l>O. ii. 23        Evan. 94</l>
<l>O. ii. 27        Evan. 92</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Geneva</hi> 19      Evan. 75      2</l>
<l>20      Act. 29</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>St. Gall</hi>      Evan. Δ      3</l>
<l>17      Evan. O<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi></l>
<l>        Evan. W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>c</hi></l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Zurich</hi>      Evan. O<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi>  1
</p>

<p>
TURKEY.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Oriental Monasteries.</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Albania</hi>      7</l>
<l>Beratinus        Evan. Φ</l>
<l>Berat, Abp.      Evann. 1141</l>
<l>                 Act. 380</l>
<l>                 Apost. 153</l>
<l>In churches      Evann. 1142-43</l>
<l>                 Evst. 758</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Andros</hi> 1, 33, 34, 35, 37,      11</l>
<l>38, 48, 49, 50   Evann. 1286-94</l>
<l>2, 3             Apost. 255-6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>Chalcis</hi>                        37</l>
<l>Mon. Trin. 1, 2, 3, 4               Evann. 727, -28, -31, -32</l>
<l>Schol. 95,  133                     Evann. 734-5</l>
<l>Trin. 16; Schol. 9, 26, 33, 96      Act. 382-6</l>
<l>Trin. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,</l>
<l>8, 9, 10; Schol. 1, 2,</l>
<l>3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 12, 74, 84         Evst. 770-89</l>
<l>Trin. 13, 14, 15; School</l>
<l>59, 74, 88                        Apost. 154-9</l>
</lg>

<pb n='408'/><anchor id='Pg408'/>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Constantinople</hi>       21
</p>

<lg>
<l>Ἁγ. τάφ. 436, 520        Evann. 721-2</l>
<l>574                              Evan. 724</l>
<l>Ἑλλ. φιλ. συλλ. 1, 5      Evann. 725-6</l>
<l>Patriarch of Jerusalem's Library 10       Evst. 413</l>
<l>St. George 1, 2; ἁγ. τάφ.</l>
<l>1, 2, 426, 432; Ἑλλ.</l>
<l>phil. syll.                      Evst. 790-6</l>
<l>St. Sepulchre 227, 417,</l>
<l>419, 435, 439, 441                Evann. 1150-5</l>
<l>2, 3                              Paul. 411-12</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Kosinitsa</hi>            15
</p>

<lg>
<l>124, 275      ג, ד, p. 377</l>
<l>219, 58, 216, 217, 218,</l>
<l>219, 220, 222, 223,</l>
<l>198         Evann. 1295-1304</l>
<l>3 MSS         Apost. 267-9</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Lesbos</hi>                   23
</p>

<lg>
<l>Mon. 356, 67, 97, 99                      Evann. 1156-9</l>
<l>141, 145, 227, Ταξιάρχοι       Evann. 1280-3</l>
<l>132                                       Act. 303</l>
<l>55                                        Act. 323</l>
<l>Τ. Λείμωνος 1, 37, 38, 40,</l>
<l>41, 66             Evst. 798-803</l>
<l>100, 146           Evst. 936-7</l>
<l>55, 137            Apost. 227-8</l>
<l>Ἰωάννου 11, 12             Evst. 938-9</l>
<l>Benjamin Library at Potamos           Evst. 940</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Milos</hi>       1
</p>

<p>
Evst. 412
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Mitylene</hi>          2
</p>

<p>
9, 41       Evann. 1284-5
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Patmos</hi>        66
</p>

<lg>
<l>St. John 2, 6, 21                Evann. 717-9</l>
<l>58, 59, 60, 76, 80, 81,</l>
<l>82, 83, 84, 90, 92, 94,</l>
<l>95, 96, 97, 98, 100,</l>
<l>117, 203, 275, 333,</l>
<l>335                            Evann. 1160-81</l>
<l>27, 31                         Act. 319-20</l>
<l>14, 15, 16, 263                Act. 387-90</l>
<l>61, 62, 63, 116                Paul. 413-6</l>
<l>12, 64                         Apoc. 178-9</l>
<l>4                              Evst. 391</l>
<l>10, 22, 81                     Evst. 400-2</l>
<l>68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74,</l>
<l>75, 77, 78, 79, 85, 86,</l>
<l>87, 88, 89, 91, 93, 99,</l>
<l>101, 330, 331, 332             Evst. 805-27</l>
<l>11, 12                         Apost. 160-1</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Smyrna</hi>            3
</p>

<p>
Γ᾽ 1, 2, 5      Evann. 1257-9
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Thessalonica</hi>        19
</p>

<lg>
<l>Ἑλλην. Γυμνασίου</l>
<l>6, 11             Evann. 1182-3</l>
<l>Α, Β, Γ, Δ, Ε, Ζ, Θ, ΙΔ       Evst. 830-7</l>
<l>12, 15, 16        Act. 391-3</l>
<l>10                Apoc. 183</l>
<l>8, 10, 13         Apost. 162-4</l>
<l>Μ. Σπύριος 1        Evan. 1184</l>
<l>           2        Evst. 838</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Athos</hi>       519
</p>

<lg>
<l>Anna 11                        Apoc. 164</l>
<l>Caracalla 19, 20, 31, 34,</l>
<l>35, 36, 37, 111,</l>
<l>121, 128, 198                Evann. 1032-42</l>
<l>3, 11, 15, 16, 17            Evst. 688-92</l>
<l>10, 156                      Apost. 136-7</l>
<l>Constamonitou 1, 61,</l>
<l>106                          Evann. 1043-5</l>
<l>99                           Evan. 1309</l>
<l>108                          Act. 366</l>
<l>29, 107                      Apoc. 176-7</l>
<l>6, 98, 100                   Evst. 693-5</l>
<l>98, 100                      Evst. 941-2</l>
<l>21, 22, 23                   Apost. 138-40</l>
<l>Chiliandari 5, 19, 105         Evann. 1138-40</l>
<l>6                            Evan. 1308</l>
<l>6, 15                        Evst. 756-7</l>
<l>Coutloumoussi 67, 68,</l>
<l>69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74,</l>
<l>75, 76, 77, 78, 90<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>,</l>
<l>278, 281, 283, 284,</l>
<l>285, 286, 287, 288,</l>
<l>289, 290, 291, 293           Evann. 1046-70</l>
<l>16, 57, 80, 81, 82, 83,</l>
<l>275                          Act. 367-73</l>
<l>90<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>b</hi>, 129                  Paul. 409-10</l>
<l>60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65,</l>
<l>66, 86, 90, 279, 280,</l>
<l>282, 292, 356                Evst. 696-709</l>
<l>277, 344, 355                Apost. 141-3</l>
<l>Dionysius       Evan. Ω</l>
<l>4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 12, 22,</l>
<l>23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28,</l>
<l>29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34,</l>
<l>35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40,</l>
<l>64, 67, 80, 310, 311,</l>
<l>312, 313, 314, 315,</l>
<l>316, 317, 318, 319,</l>
<l>320, 321                  Evann. 924-63</l>
<l>68, 75, 382               Act. 344-6</l>
<l>163                       Apoc. 167</l>
<l>1, 2, 3, 6, 11, 13, 14,</l>
<l>15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20,</l>
<l>21, 85, 163, 302, 303,</l>
<l>304, 305, 306, 307,</l>
<l>308, 309                  Evst. 627-50</l>
<l>23                        Evst. 540</l>
</lg>

<pb n='409'/><anchor id='Pg409'/>

<lg>
<l>Total</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>mss.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dionysius (cont.)&mdash;</l>
<l>378      Evst. 557</l>
<l>386      Apost. 169</l>
<l>387      Apost. 180</l>
<l>392      Apost. 184</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Docheiariou      7, 21, 22,</l>
<l>30, 35, 39, 42, 46,</l>
<l>49, 51, 52, 55, 56,</l>
<l>59, 76, 142      Evann. 964-79</l>
<l>38, 48, 136, 139, 147      Act. 347-51</l>
<l>81      Apoc. 168</l>
<l>1, 10, 13, 14, 15, 19,</l>
<l>23, 24, 36, 58, 137      Evst. 651-61</l>
<l>20, 27, 141, 146      Apost. 131-4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esphigmenou 25, 26, 27,</l>
<l>29, 30, 31, 186      Evann. 980-6</l>
<l>63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68      Act. 352-7</l>
<l>19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24,</l>
<l>27, 28, 35, 60      Evst.662-71</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gregory 3, and τ. ἡγουμένου      Evann. 922-3</l>
<l>In Ecclesia.      Evan. 1090</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iveron 2, 5, 7, 9, 18, 19,</l>
<l>21, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32,</l>
<l>33, 51, 52, 53, 55, 56,</l>
<l>59, 61, 63, 66, 67, 68,</l>
<l>69, 72, 75, 371, 548,</l>
<l>549, 550, 562, 599,</l>
<l>607, 608, 610, 636,</l>
<l>641, 647, 665, 671,</l>
<l>809, 871      Evann.      989-1031</l>
<l>639      Act. 322</l>
<l>24, 25, 37, 57, 60, 642,</l>
<l>643, 648      Act. 358-65</l>
<l>34, 379, 546, 594, 605,</l>
<l>644, 661      Apoc. 169-75</l>
<l>1, 3, 4, 6, 20, 23, 35,</l>
<l>36, 39, 635, 637,</l>
<l>638, 639,640, 825,</l>
<l>826      Evst. 672-87</l>
<l>831      Apost. 135</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laura      Evan. Ψ</l>
<l>Evann. 1071-80</l>
<l>Act. S</l>
<l>Paul. S</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Panteleemon 25, 26, 28,</l>
<l>29      Evann. 1091-4</l>
<l>L, IV. vi. 4, IX. v.</l>
<l>3, XXVII. vi. 2,</l>
<l>XXVII.  vi.  3,</l>
<l>XXVIII. i. 1      Evst. 722-7</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paul 4, 5      Evann. 1095-6</l>
<l>1      Evan. 1307</l>
<l>2      Act. 374</l>
<l>1      Evst. 728</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philotheou 5, 21, 22,</l>
<l>33, 39, 41, 44, 45, 46,</l>
<l>47, 48, 51, 53, 68, 71,</l>
<l>72, 74, 77, 78, 80, 86,      Evann. 1117-37</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Total</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>mss.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philotheou (cont.)&mdash;</l>
<l>38, 76      Act. 378-9</l>
<l>1, 2, 3, 6, 18, 25, 61,</l>
<l>213      Evst. 748-55</l>
<l>17  Apost. 152</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Protaton 41      Evan. 1097</l>
<l>15, 44      Evann. 1305-6</l>
<l>32      Act. 375</l>
<l>11, 14, 15, 44, 56      Evst. 729-33</l>
<l>54      Apost. 144</l>
<l>32      Apost. 262</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simopetra 25, 26, 29,</l>
<l>34, 38, 39, 40, 41,</l>
<l>63, 145, 146, 147      Evann.      1098-1109</l>
<l>42      Act. 376</l>
<l>148      Evst. 464</l>
<l>17, 19, 20, 21, 24, 27,</l>
<l>28, 30, 33, 70      Evst. 734-43</l>
<l>6, 10, 148, 149, 150,</l>
<l>151      Apost. 145-50</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Andrew Evan. ב</l>
<l>Α᾽, Ε᾽, Η᾽, Θ᾽     Evann. 905-8</l>
<l>Γ᾽, Λ᾽, ϛ᾽, Ζ      Evst. 579-82</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stauroniketa 43, 53, 54,</l>
<l>56, 70, 97, 127      Evann. 1110-6</l>
<l>52      Act. 377</l>
<l>1, 27, 42, 102      Evst. 744-7</l>
<l>129      Apost. 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vatopedi      206, 207, 211,</l>
<l>212, 213, 214, 215,</l>
<l>216, 217, 218, 219,</l>
<l>220, 414      Evann. 909-21</l>
<l>41, 201, 203, 210, 259,</l>
<l>328, 380, 419      Act. 336-43</l>
<l>90, 90 (2)      Apoc. 165-6</l>
<l>48, 192, 193, 194, 195,</l>
<l>196, 197, 198, 200,</l>
<l>202, 204, 205, 208,</l>
<l>209, 220, 221, 223,</l>
<l>224, 225, 226, 227,</l>
<l>228, 229, 230, 231,</l>
<l>232, 233, 234, 235,</l>
<l>236, 237, 238, 239,</l>
<l>240, 241, 242, 243,</l>
<l>253, 254, 255, 256,</l>
<l>257, 271, 291      Evst. 583-626</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Xenophon 1, 3, 58      Evann. 1310-2</l>
<l>1, 58, 59, 68      Evst. 710-13</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Xeropotamou 103, 105,</l>
<l>107, 108, 115, 123,</l>
<l>200, 205, 221      Evann. 1081-89</l>
<l>110, 112, 118, 122,</l>
<l>125, 126, 234, 247      Evst. 714-21</l>
</lg>

<p>
Zographou 4, 14      Evann. 987-8
</p>

<pb n='410'/><anchor id='Pg410'/>

<p>
UNITED STATES.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Massachusetts&mdash;</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Cambridge, Harvard</hi>          5
</p>

<lg>
<l>Greg. 466                  Evan. 899</l>
<l>1<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>h</hi>, 2<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>h</hi>, 3<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>h</hi>        Evst. 483-5</l>
<l>K. 1                       Apost. 74</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Andover</hi>             1
</p>

<p>
Evst. 463
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>New Caesarea&mdash;</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Madison</hi>               3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drew 3             Evan. 900</l>
<l>?             Paul. 371</l>
<l>2             Evst. 486</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Princetown</hi>           1
</p>

<p>
Evst. 491
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>New York</hi>          2
</p>

<lg>
<l>Seminary, Theol. Univ.            Evst. 929</l>
<l>Astor's Library                   Apost. 198</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Pennsylvania</hi>         2
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sewickley</hi>            Evst. 487, 489
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Tennessee&mdash;</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sewanee</hi>            3
</p>

<lg>
<l>Benton 2, 3          Evann. 901-2</l>
<l>                     Evst. 490</l>
</lg>

<p>
Manuscripts whose present location is unknown              30
</p>

<lg>
<l>Evst. Banduri              Evst. 482 (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Evan. O)</l>
<l>Evan. T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>s</hi></l>
<l>Evan. 42</l>
<l>Evan. 88, 91, 93</l>
<l>Evan. 101 (Uffenbach 3)</l>
<l>Evan. 102</l>
<l>Evan. 104 (Vigner)</l>
<l>Evan. 181 (Xavier)</l>
<l>Evan. 216</l>
<l>Evan. 253</l>
<l>Evan. 436</l>
<l>Evan. 543 (Theodori)</l>
<l>Act. 8</l>
<l>Act. 39</l>
<l>Act. 44</l>
<l>Act. 50</l>
<l>Act. 52</l>
<l>Act. 55, i.e. Evan. 90</l>
<l>Act. 171</l>
<l>Act. 172</l>
<l>Paul. 13</l>
<l>Paul. 15</l>
<l>Paul. 60</l>
<l>Apoc. 3</l>
<l>Apoc. 5</l>
<l>Evst. 23</l>
<l>Evst. 33</l>
<l>Evst. 153</l>
<l>Evst. 156</l>
<l>Apost. 3 (Batteley)</l>
</lg>

<p>
TOTAL NUMBER OF GREEK MSS., ARRANGED ACCORDING TO COUNTRIES.
</p>

<lg>
<l>British Empire                                          438</l>
<l>Belgium (2), Denmark (3), Holland (7), Sweden (7)        19</l>
<l>Egypt                                                    26</l>
<l>France                                                  324</l>
<l>Germany                                                 140</l>
<l>Greece                                                  197</l>
<l>Italy                                                   644</l>
<l>Carried forward                 1788</l>
<l>Brought forward                 1788</l>
<l>Palestine                                               260</l>
<l>Russia                                                  104</l>
<l>Spain                                                    34</l>
<l>Switzerland                                              15</l>
<l>Turkey (Oriental Monasteries)                           724</l>
<l>United States                                            17</l>
<l>Places unknown                                           30</l>
<l>Total                                             2972</l>
</lg>

</div>

<pb n='411'/><anchor id='Pg411'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index II. Of Writers, Past Owners, And Collators Of Mss.</head>

<p>
E (Evan.), A (Acts and Cath. Epp.), P (Paul), Apoc. (Apocalypse), Evst.
(Evangelistarium), Apost. (Apostolos).
</p>

<lg>
<l>Abbott, T. K.      Z (E)</l>
<l>490 (E)</l>
</lg>

<p>
Aberdeen, Earl of       544 (E)
</p>

<p>
Accida       132 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Accidas, F.       376 (E)
</p>

<p>
Adrianople       163 (P)
</p>

<p>
Ædilium, Lib.       198 (E)
</p>

<p>
Agen      445 (E), 31 (Apoc.)
</p>

<p>
Ailli, H.       331 (E)
</p>

<p>
Aldi       131 (E)
</p>

<p>
Alefson, G.       266 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Alex. II       א, p. 91
</p>

<p>
Alex. II, Comnenus       86 (E), 235 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Alex. VIII, Pope       40 (A)
</p>

<p>
Alexius       241, 388 (E)
</p>

<p>
Alexopoulos, Const.       306 (A)
</p>

<p>
Alford, B. H.       T (E)
38 (Apoc.)
</p>

<p>
Alford, Dean       B, p. 114
</p>

<p>
Altamps, Duke of       202 (P)
</p>

<p>
Altemprianus       703 (E)
</p>

<p>
Alter       N (E) 3, 77, 124, 218-225 (E)
</p>

<p>
Alypius, C.       248 (E)
</p>

<p>
Amerbach       2(A)
</p>

<p>
Andreas, monk       232 (A)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, scribe       180 (E), 542 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Andriani, A.       391 (E)
</p>

<p>
Angelus, J.       386 (E)
</p>

<p>
Anthimus       160 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Antonius       220 (A)
445 (E)
</p>

<p>
Antony, priest       343 (E)
p. <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref> note
</p>

<p>
Archipelago, Gk.       509 (E)
</p>

<p>
Arendt       431 (E)
</p>

<p>
Argenson       158 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Argyropolus       229(E)
</p>

<p>
Arrivabene       448 (E)
</p>

<p>
Arsenius, Abp.       333 (E), 66 (A)
675 (E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, Provost       310 (E)
</p>

<p>
Arundel, Earl of       566 (E)
</p>

<p>
Arundell, F. V. J.       588 (E)
</p>

<p>
Askew, Ant.       444 (E)
22 (A)
23 (Apoc.)
</p>

<p>
Athanasius, Convent of St.       36, 39 (E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, Monastery of St.       254, 330 (E)
16, 97 (A)
123 (P)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, Gk. monk       116 (E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, priest       498 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, scribe       139 (A)
</p>

<p>
<q>Athenian Aberdeen</q>       238 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Audley, Bp.       56 (E)
</p>

<p>
Augia, Dives       F (P)
</p>

<p>
Aymont       D (P)
</p>

<p>
Azzolini, Card.       154-156 (E)
</p>

<p>
Banduri, A.       O (E)
</p>

<p>
Barrett       61 (E)
</p>

<p>
Bartholomew       164 (E)
</p>

<p>
Bartolocci       B, p. 110
</p>

<p>
Basilian Monks' Lib.       173-177 (E)
</p>

<p>
Batiffol, P.       Φ (E)
</p>

<p>
Batteley       3 (Apost.)
</p>

<p>
Battier, J.       E (E)
</p>

<p>
Begtrup       33 (E)
</p>

<p>
Bengel, J.       E (E), 2 (E)
</p>

<p>
Bennet, G.       516 (E)
</p>

<p>
Bentley, R.       A, p. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n</hi>
B, p. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>
D (E)
G, H (E)
113, 117, 507, 508 (E)
24 (A)
</p>

<pb n='412'/><anchor id='Pg412'/>

<p>
Bentley, R.       F (P)
28 (Apoc.)
257 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, T.       B, p. 110
</p>

<p>
Benzel E.       238 (A)
</p>

<p>
Benzelstierna       400 (E)
</p>

<p>
Benzil      400 (E)
</p>

<p>
Berzi, P. de       43 (E)
</p>

<p>
Berzian, de       54 (A)
</p>

<p>
Bessarion, Card.       B, p. <ref target='Pg108'>105</ref>
205-215, 217 (E)
</p>

<p>
Bey, Dr. H. B.       א, p. <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>
</p>

<p>
Beza, Theodore       D (E, A)
</p>

<p>
Bianchini       L (A)
</p>

<p>
Bigot       162 (P)
</p>

<p>
Birch       B, p. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>.
S, T (E), L (A).
124, 127, 131, 157, 209, 218-225 (E).
70-96 (A).
77-112 (P).
38 (Apoc.).
35-39 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Björnsthal       615, 616 (E), 236 (A)
</p>

<p>
Blasius       293 (E).
382 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Blenheim, Sunderland Lib.       Υ (E).
523 (E)
282-284 (Evst.)
52 (Apost.)
</p>

<p>
Bloomfield, S. T.       573-590 (E).
22 (A), 104 (P).
150, 223-6 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Bodet, W.       70 (E)
</p>

<p>
Boecler, H.       78 (A)
</p>

<p>
Boener, C. F.       G (P).
78 (E)
</p>

<p>
Bohn       562 (E)
</p>

<p>
Boistaller       263, 301, 306, 314 (E), 131 (A), 86 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Boivin       C, p. <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>
</p>

<p>
Bonvisi family       452 (E)
</p>

<p>
Boone       267 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Boreel, J.       F (E)
</p>

<p>
Borrell       588 (E)
</p>

<p>
Bourbon, Card.       17 (E)
</p>

<p>
Bragge, Alderman       255 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Braun       405 (E)
</p>

<p>
Brixius       228 (E)
</p>

<p>
Brizopoulos       157 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Brühl       32 (Apoc.)
57 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Brunswick, Duke of       P, Q (E)
</p>

<p>
Brussels, Dom. Lib.       3 (E)
</p>

<p>
Brynkley       69 (E)
</p>

<p>
Bulkeley       63, 64 (E)
</p>

<p>
Bunckle       70 (E)
</p>

<p>
Burdett-Coutts       545-553 (E)
</p>

<p>
Burgon, Dean       B, p. <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>.
X (E)
</p>

<p>
Burgon, Dean, 2, 346, 464, 562-565 (E).
223 (A).
35 (Apoc.)
255 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Burney, Ch.       514, 568 (E)
</p>

<p>
Busbeck, O. de       123, 218, 221, 222, 434 (E).
64 (A), 67 (A)
</p>

<p>
Butler, S., Bp.       201, 576-579, 608 (E).
261 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Bynaeus       80 (E)
</p>

<p>
Caesarea       H (P)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash; Philippi        575 (E)
</p>

<p>
Calistus       286 (E)
</p>

<p>
Calvert, E.       737 (E)
</p>

<p>
Camerarius       88 (E)
</p>

<p>
Camps, de, F.       M (E)
</p>

<p>
Cannabetes, N.       18 (E)
</p>

<p>
Canonici       216, 488-491 (E)
</p>

<p>
Cantacuzenus       775 (E), 162 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Caracalla       534 (E), 234 (Evst.), 95, 96 (Apoc.)
217 (A), 537, 538 (E)
</p>

<p>
Carlenizza       39 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Carlotta, Q.       246 (A)
</p>

<p>
Carlyle, J. D.       509 (E).
182 (A)
</p>

<p>
Carpzov, S. B. &amp; J. G.       78 (E)
</p>

<p>
Cassan       517 (E)
</p>

<p>
Catharine, St., Sinai, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Sinai
</p>

<p>
Cellérier       75 (E)
</p>

<p>
Ceriani       346 (E)
</p>

<p>
Cerularius       437 (E)
</p>

<p>
Chalké, Trinity Monastery       513 (E)
</p>

<p>
Chambellan       287 (E)
</p>

<p>
Charito       86 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Chark, W.       61, 69 (E)
</p>

<p>
Charles I, king       A, pp. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>
</p>

<p>
Chester, Rev. G. J.       325 (E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, Greville       T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> (E), 298 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Chiesley, Sir J.       519 (E)
</p>

<p>
Chisiana, Lib.       414 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Christina, Q.       154-156 (E), 38, 40(A)
</p>

<p>
Chrysographus       347 (E)
</p>

<p>
Chrysostom, Monastery of St.       408 (E)
</p>

<p>
Ciampini       45 (A)
</p>

<p>
Cisissa       234 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Claromontanus       D (P)
</p>

<p>
Clement       61 (E)
</p>

<p>
Clermont, Jesuit Coll. at       436 (E)
</p>

<p>
Coislin, Bp.       H (P).
34-41, 437 (E), 69 (Apoc.)
</p>

<pb n='413'/><anchor id='Pg413'/>

<p>
Colbert       267, 273, 279, 281-283, 286-288, 291, 294, 296, 310, 315, 318, 319 (E).
62, 115, 121 (A).
145-148, 157 (P).
58, 61, 63 (Apoc.)
60, 68, 71, 76, 78, 87-91, 99-101 (Evst.)
25, 27, 33, 34 (Apost.)
</p>

<p>
Columnensis       689 (E), 392, 393 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Comuto, Prince       Ξ (E)
</p>

<p>
Conant       573 (E)
</p>

<p>
Constamonitou, Mon.       5 (Apost.)
</p>

<p>
Constantine, Emp.       118 <hi rend='italic'>n</hi> 2
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, monk       174, 577, 919 (E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, priest       150 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Constantinople       509, 606, 607, 1261 (E).
125 (A), 157 (P).
64, 77, 95, 281, 289, 390 (Evst.)
22 (Apost.)
</p>

<p>
Corbinelli       200 (E)
</p>

<p>
Corcyra       623 (E), 106 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Cordatus       73 (E)
</p>

<p>
Corfu, Univ. of       583 (E)
</p>

<p>
Cornelianus       103 (Evst.), 46 (Apost.)
</p>

<p>
Corsendonck, Convent at       3 (A, P)
</p>

<p>
Corvenus       77, 78 (E)
</p>

<p>
Cosmas, monk       590 (E), 304 (A), 8 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash; Oricell.       368 (E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash; Vanaretus       590 (E)
</p>

<p>
Covell, Dr.       65 (E), 26, 27 (A), 150 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Cowper, B. H.       A, p. <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>
</p>

<p>
Coxe       105, 591 (E), 212 (A)
</p>

<p>
Cozza       B, p. <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>
</p>

<p>
Croze, La       G, H (E)
</p>

<p>
Crusius       430 (E)
</p>

<p>
Cure       B, p. <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>
</p>

<p>
Cureton, Canon       R (E)
</p>

<p>
Curzon, R. (Lord de la Zouche)       534-541 (E).
95 (Apoc.)
234 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Cusa, de Hosp.       59 (A)
</p>

<p>
Cuza, N. de       87, 129 (E)
</p>

<p>
Cyprus, Q. of       140 (E)
</p>

<p>
Cyril Lucar       A, pp. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>
</p>

<p>
Damarius       228 (E)
</p>

<p>
Damascenus       488 (E)
</p>

<p>
Dandolo       233 (E)
</p>

<p>
Daniel, Bp. of Proconnesus       65 (E)
</p>

<p>
Dassdorf       32 (Apoc.)
</p>

<p>
Denys, St.       60 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
D'Eon       23 (Apoc.), 259 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Dermout       122, 435 (E), 6 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
De Rossi       360, 361 (E)
</p>

<p>
Desalleurs       158 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Diassorin       40 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Dickinson, J.       D, p. 126
</p>

<p>
Didot       80 (E)
</p>

<p>
Dionysius, Monast. of       O (E), K (A), 240 (E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, monk       255 (E)
</p>

<p>
Dizomaeus       288 (E)
</p>

<p>
Dobbin, Dr.       58, 61 (E)
</p>

<p>
Docheiariou       233 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Dodwell       64(E)
</p>

<p>
Dometius       54 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Dupuis       321, 322, 892 (E)
</p>

<p>
Dupuy, C., J., and P.       D (P)
</p>

<p>
Engelbreth       209 (E)
</p>

<p>
Ephesus, Abp. of       71 (E)
</p>

<p>
Eschenbach, von       105 (E)
</p>

<p>
Escurial       569 (E)
</p>

<p>
Esphigmenou, Monast.       14 (Apost.)
</p>

<p>
Eucholius       38 (Apost.)
</p>

<p>
Eugenia       165 (E)
</p>

<p>
Euphemius       634, 651 (E)
</p>

<p>
Euthymius       947 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Evagrius       83 (A)
</p>

<p>
Faber       90 (E)
</p>

<p>
Fasch, A.       92, 94 (E)
</p>

<p>
Fenton, Jo.       186 (A)
</p>

<p>
Finch       19 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Fleck       L (A)
</p>

<p>
Flemyng, Dean       33 (A)
</p>

<p>
Florence, Grand Ducal Palace at       117 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, St. Maria, Lib. at       199, 200 (E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, St. Mark, at       201-203 (E)
</p>

<p>
Forerunner, Monast. of       261 (E), 231 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Foss       211 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Franciscus       132 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Francius       G (P)
</p>

<p>
Francklin, Prof.       21 (A)
</p>

<p>
Freeman, H. S.       599 (E), 273-277 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Fresne, Du       260, 309 (E)
</p>

<p>
Friars, Grey (Camb.)       591 (E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, Minor (Oxf.)       59 (E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, Preaching       2 (A)
</p>

<p>
Froy, F.       61 (E)
</p>

<p>
Gabriel (Met. of Philadelphia)       333 (E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, monk       491 (E)
</p>

<p>
Gage, F.       278 (Evst.)
</p>

<pb n='414'/><anchor id='Pg414'/>

<p>
Gage, T. 602 (E)
</p>

<p>
Gale, T. 66 (E), 221 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Gehl 89 (E)
</p>

<p>
George, monk 69 (A), 71 (Evst.)
Scribe 725, 743 (E), 166 (A), 113, 126, 553 (Evst.)
Son of Elias 166 (A)
</p>

<p>
Georgilas 1262 (E)
</p>

<p>
Georgios 78 (E)
</p>

<p>
Georgirenus 279 (E)
</p>

<p>
Gerbert Δ (E)
</p>

<p>
Germain, St., des Prés E (P), 437 (E)
</p>

<p>
Germanus 122 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Giorgi T (E)
</p>

<p>
Gleichgross 86 (E)
</p>

<p>
Goad, T. 64(E)
</p>

<p>
Gonzaga 448 (E)
</p>

<p>
Googe 62 (E)
</p>

<p>
Graeirus 80 (E)
</p>

<p>
Grazia, di 162 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Gregory, monk 438 (E)
</p>

<p>
Griesbach L (E), M (P) 33, 118, 236, 440 (E) 60 (A)
18-22,  25-30 (Evst.)
5 (Apost.)
</p>

<p>
Gross V (E)
</p>

<p>
Grotta Ferrata M of Gregory (A)
</p>

<p>
Guest, J. 232 (A).
J. B. 603 (E), 232 (A), 279, 280 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Guildford, Lord 529, 531 (E)
</p>

<p>
Hacket, Bp. p. 89 note
</p>

<p>
Hackwell 96 (E)
</p>

<p>
Hagen, J. van der 80 (E)
</p>

<p>
Hamilton 632 (E), 368, 369 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Hammond, Dr. 57 (E)
</p>

<p>
Hantin 62<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (E)
</p>

<p>
Harley, Earl of Oxford  D (P), 150 (Evst)
</p>

<p>
Harnack Σ (E)
</p>

<p>
Harris (of Alex.) 230 (A), 262 (Evst.)
J. R. 892 (E), 488 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Hatcher 59 (E)
</p>

<p>
Hayne 69 (E)
</p>

<p>
Heimbach 209 (E)
</p>

<p>
Helias, priest 60 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Henry IV, king 269 (E)
</p>

<p>
Heraclea, Ch. of 523 (E), 52 (Apost.)
</p>

<p>
Heringa F (E)
</p>

<p>
Hermonymus 30, 62<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>, 70, 287, 288 (E).
145 (P)
</p>

<p>
Herries, Lord 580 (E)
</p>

<p>
Hext, Capt. J. 617 (E)
</p>

<p>
Hieracis Deiparae, Monast. 281 (E)
</p>

<p>
Hilarion 535 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Hincklemann 90 (E)
</p>

<p>
Hoffmann 124 (E)
</p>

<p>
Hort, Dr. T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> (E)
</p>

<p>
Hoskier 75, 604 (E)
</p>

<p>
Huet 366 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Hug B, p. <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>
</p>

<p>
Huish A, p. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>
</p>

<p>
Huntingdon, Earl of 64 (E)
</p>

<p>
Huntington, Bp. 67 (E), 30 (A)
</p>

<p>
Iberian Monastery 243, 259 (E).
99, 103 (A).
50, 50<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Apoc.)
48 (Evst.)
13 (Apost.)
</p>

<p>
Ignatius (Metrop.) 282 (Evst.)
Monk 86 (Evst.)
Scribe 69 (Apost.)
</p>

<p>
Innocent VIII 246 (A)
</p>

<p>
Irene 210 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Iveron, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Iberian
</p>

<p>
Jackson 69, 106, 573 (E)
</p>

<p>
James, monk 507 (E)
</p>

<p>
Janina 763, 771 (E), 266 (P), 89 (Apoc.)
</p>

<p>
Jeremias, Patr. 98 (A)
</p>

<p>
Jerusalem, Lib. 416 (A)
</p>

<p>
Joachim, monk 166 (A), 13 (Apost.)
</p>

<p>
Joasaph 410, 561 (E), 169 (A)
</p>

<p>
John 374 (E), 267 (Apost.)
Monk 560 (E), 61 (A).
Priest 245, 429 (E), 71, 170 (Evst.)
Reader 592, 1311 (E).
Rossan 325, 347 (Evst.)
Scribe 180 (E), 64 (A), 567 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Johnson, T. 72 (E)
</p>

<p>
Jones, J. 64 (E)
</p>

<p>
Joseph, monk 422 (E), 537 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Junius, P. G (P)
</p>

<p>
Justinas, St. 200 (E)
</p>

<p>
Justinian, Aug.. 285 (E)
</p>

<p>
Knobelsdorf, W. E. de 433 (E)
</p>

<p>
Kuster C, p. 122
</p>

<p>
Lambeth, Lib. 514, 516 (E), 186 (A)
</p>

<p>
Lammens 527 (E)
</p>

<p>
Lampros, Sp. P. 269-272 (E), 592, 596, 597 (E).
107 (A), 418 (A), 269 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Landolina 113 (Apost.)
</p>

<p>
Landolini 421 (E)
</p>

<p>
Langer 97(A)
</p>

<p>
Larroque 27-33 (E)
</p>

<p>
Lascar, J. 12 (A)
</p>

<p>
Lascaris 210 (A)
</p>

<p>
Laud, Abp. E (A)
</p>

<pb n='415'/><anchor id='Pg415'/>

<p>
Laura, Monast.      S (A), 20, 23 (P)
</p>

<p>
Leo (of Calabria)      124 (E).
&mdash;&mdash;, scribe      164, 589 (E), 67 (A)
</p>

<p>
Leon      538, 541 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Leontius       186, 430 (E), 91, 215 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Lesoeuf      80 (E)
</p>

<p>
Loescher      32  (Apoc.),  57 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Louis, St.      38 (E)
</p>

<p>
Louis XIV      M (E), 279 (E)
</p>

<p>
Lucas, P.      264 (E)
</p>

<p>
Lucas      289 (E)
</p>

<p>
Lucca, Lib.      452 (E)
</p>

<p>
Luke, monk      230 (E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, Prof.      21 (A)
</p>

<p>
Lyons, Jesuits' Pub. Lib.      298(E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, Monast. of St. Iren.      D, p. 125
</p>

<p>
Macarius      1283 (E)
</p>

<p>
Macdonald      581, 582 (E)
</p>

<p>
Maglorian, San, Oratory of      54 (A)
</p>

<p>
Mai, Card.      B, p. 112
</p>

<p>
Maius      97 (E)
</p>

<p>
Mangey, Th.      483, 492, 496, 498, 503 (E).
26, 27 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Manuel      162, 293 (E)
</p>

<p>
Mare, P. de la      265 (E)
</p>

<p>
Maria, Jo.      285 (E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, Q.      40 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, St.      367 (E)
</p>

<p>
Marini      N (E)
</p>

<p>
Marsh, Abp.      118 (E)
</p>

<p>
Mary, St., Ben. Lib.      148 (A)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash; Deipara, St., Convent      R (E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, empress      419 (A)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, St., of Patirium      ב (A, P)
</p>

<p>
Masieli, P.      12 (A)
</p>

<p>
Matthaei      V (E), K (A).
89, 237-259, 605 (E).
98-107 (A).
76, 113-124 (P).
32 (Apoc.)
47 (Evst.)
5 (Apost.)
</p>

<p>
Matthew, monk      416, 418 (A)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, scribe      1307 (E)
</p>

<p>
Maura      459, 460 (E)
</p>

<p>
Maurice      100 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Mauron      341 (E)
</p>

<p>
Maurus      427 (E)
</p>

<p>
Maximilian      p. <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref> note.
146 (E)
</p>

<p>
Mazarin, Card.      103, 278, 302, 305,
308, 311, 313,
324 (E).
51 (A), 74, 98 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Mead, Dr.      22 (A), 23 (Apoc.)
</p>

<p>
Medici      16, 19, 121, 196, C.
(E), 317 (E)
12, 126 (A), 164 (P)
</p>

<p>
Meerman      122, 436, 562 (E),
178 (A), 153
(Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Meletius      248, 281 (E)
</p>

<p>
Mendham      562 (E)
</p>

<p>
Menon      230 (A), 262 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Merlin      601 (E)
</p>

<p>
Michael      30 (Apoc.), 531
(Evst.)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, St., Monast.      253 (E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, monk      S (E).
1156 (E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, priest      394 (E)
</p>

<p>
Michaelis      772 (E)
</p>

<p>
Mico      B, p. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>.
91 (Apoc.)
</p>

<p>
Middeldorpf      42 (A)
</p>

<p>
Mieg      F (P)
</p>

<p>
Mill      D, p. <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>.
K (E), E (P), 51,
59, 69 (E), 18-22
(Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Missy, Caesar de      44, 449, 520, 521,
543 (E), 230, 231
(Evst.)
5, 45 (Apost.)
</p>

<p>
Moira, John, Earl of      64 (E)
</p>

<p>
Moldenhawer      226-233 (E), 35-40
(Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Molsheim, Jes. Coll.      431 (E)
</p>

<p>
Montagnana, P. de      217 (E)
</p>

<p>
Montfaucon      O (E), 482 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Montfort, Dr.      61 (E)
</p>

<p>
Moore, Bp.      60, 62<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>, 70 (E)
</p>

<p>
Morrian      288 (E)
</p>

<p>
Mould      116, 444 (E)
</p>

<p>
Müller, Prof.      E (E)
</p>

<p>
Muller      736 (E)
</p>

<p>
Munich, Jes. Coll.      127 (P)
</p>

<p>
Münter      U (E)
</p>

<p>
Muralt      B, p. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>.
473-477 (E)
</p>

<p>
Nanianus      U (E)
</p>

<p>
Nani family      405-418 (E)
</p>

<p>
Naples, Conv. of St.     Jo. de Carbon  108 (E)
</p>

<p>
Napoleon I      B, p. 105
</p>

<p>
Nathanael, N.      228 (E)
</p>

<p>
Neophytus      591 (E)
</p>

<p>
Nepho      439(E)
</p>

<p>
Nicephorus      276 (E), 25, 48, 573
(Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Nicetas      126 (P), 231 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Nicholas, St., Monast.      40 (E)
</p>

<p>
Nicolas      291 (E), 72 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, Abp.      156 (A)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, Card.      87 (E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, monk      97 (E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, priest      204 (Evst.)
</p>

<pb n='416'/><anchor id='Pg416'/>

<p>
Nicolas, scribe      268 (Apost.)
</p>

<p>
Nicolaus      306 (A), 185 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Nilus      305 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Noailles, G. de      59 (Apoc.)
</p>

<p>
Norfolk, Duke of      566 (E)
</p>

<p>
North, Hon. F.      471, 531, 532, 583
(E), 198 (A)
</p>

<p>
Ὁδηγῶν, τῶν, Monast.      86 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Odessa      198 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Onesimus      20 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Pachonius      241 (E)
</p>

<p>
Padua      139 (A)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, St. John in Virid., Monast.      217 (E)
</p>

<p>
Palaeologus, Chr.      138, 288 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, Emp.      80 (Apoc.)
</p>

<p>
Palatine, Elector's Lib.    p. <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref> note      146 (E)
</p>

<p>
Panagiotes, M.      274 (E)
</p>

<p>
Pannonius      100 (E)
</p>

<p>
Panteleemon, Monast.      428 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Pantocrator, Monast.       74, 482, 493, 495,
507, 508 (E),
119 (P), 211 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Pappelbaum      400 (E)
</p>

<p>
Paradisi, Collis      414 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Parassoh      69 (Apost.)
</p>

<p>
Paris, City Lib.      288 (E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, Nat. Lib.      272 (E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, Sorbonne      290 (E)
</p>

<p>
Parodus of Smyrna  Π (E)
</p>

<p>
Parrhasius      108 (E)
</p>

<p>
Parsons, D.      617 (E)
</p>

<p>
Parthenius, Patr.      19 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Passionei, Card.      L (A),
611 (E), 723 (E)
</p>

<p>
Patmos      466 (E), 588 (E)
</p>

<p>
Patriarchal Chamber      A, p. 98
</p>

<p>
Paul, Abp.      165 (E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, priest      26 (E)
</p>

<p>
Paulus      22 (A), 32 (Apoc.)
</p>

<p>
Payne      436, 562 (E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, E.      518, 529 (E), 153,
227-229 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, T. (Archd.)      523 (E), 52 (Apost.)
</p>

<p>
Peckover, J.      560, 561 (E)
</p>

<p>
Perron, Card.     91 (E)
</p>

<p>
Petavius      38 (A)
</p>

<p>
Peter, monk      48 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Peter τοῦ Καραμανίτου      1149 (E)
</p>

<p>
Petra, Monast.      87 (E)
</p>

<p>
Philip, monk      414 (E)
</p>

<p>
Phillipps, Sir T.      526-533 (E), 178
(A)
</p>

<p>
Philotheus      235 (E)
</p>

<p>
Philotheou, Monast.      237, 240, 247 (E)
</p>

<p>
Phlebaris      489 (E)
</p>

<p>
Pickering      543 (E)
</p>

<p>
Picus      488 (E)
</p>

<p>
Pinelli      348 (E), 138 (A)
</p>

<p>
Pithaeus      42 (E)
</p>

<p>
Pius II      158 (E)
</p>

<p>
Polidore      137 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Porphyry      א, p. 91,
Q (P)
</p>

<p>
Pressburg, Lib. of the Lycaeum      86 (E)
</p>

<p>
Prusa, SS. Cosm. and Damian., Monast.      405 (E)
</p>

<p>
Puttick      598 (E)
</p>

<p>
Quaritch      560, 561, 885-887
(E)
</p>

<p>
Quirini      B, p. 187
</p>

<p>
R., A. F.      207 (E)
</p>

<p>
Ragusio, J. de      E (E)
</p>

<p>
Reggio      172 (P)
</p>

<p>
Reiche, J. G.      113, 114, 117, 127
(A)
139, 140, 153 (P),
54 (Apoc.)
</p>

<p>
Rettig      Δ (E)
</p>

<p>
Ῥενδήνη, Monast.      322 (E)
</p>

<p>
Rhodes      737 (E), 125 (P)
</p>

<p>
Rhosen      205 (E)
</p>

<p>
Rhosus      448 (E)
</p>

<p>
Rich, C. J.      574 (E)
</p>

<p>
Ridolphi, Card.      C, p. 121
</p>

<p>
Rinck      209 (E), 96 (A)
</p>

<p>
Rink      110-112 (P)
</p>

<p>
Rivet      155 (E)
</p>

<p>
Rocchi      B, p. 118
</p>

<p>
Rodd, H.      585 (E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, T.      272, 584 (E)
</p>

<p>
Roe, Sir T.      49 (E)
</p>

<p>
Romana De Alteriis      690 (E)
</p>

<p>
Romanus, priest      247 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Rome, Barberini Lib.      159 (E)
</p>

<p>
Rose, W. F.      20, 22, 300, 346,
563, 564, 565
(E),  223 (A)
255, 281 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Rostgaard      234, 235 (E)
</p>

<p>
Roth      I (E)
</p>

<p>
Royal Society      566 (E)
</p>

<p>
Rulotta      B, p. 110
</p>

<p>
Rutgersius      155 (E)
</p>

<p>
Saba, St., Conv.      I (E), I<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> (A P),
I<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>f</hi> (A)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, Monast.      310, 535, 539-541,
275 (E)
191, 216, 416, 417
(A), 236 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Sakkelion      N (E)
</p>

<p>
Salernium      196 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Salvador, St.      204 (E)
</p>

<p>
Salvator, S., de Sept., Conv. of      195 (E), 100 (P)
</p>

<p>
Salviati, Card. de      107 (A)
</p>

<p>
Sambuc      66 (A)
</p>

<pb n='417'/><anchor id='Pg417'/>

<p>
Sanderson, W.      184 (A)
</p>

<p>
Sanguntinianus      288 (E)
</p>

<p>
Scala, S. Maria della       162 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Schoenleben      105 (E)
</p>

<p>
Scholz      B, p. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>.
W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>, K, M, X, Y (E),
H, L (A),
6, 20, 33-41, 75,
138-144, 146-157,
159,  160,
162, 164-171,
173-175, 177-180,
201, 260,
262, 270, 271,
277, 284,  285,
298-301, 324,
346, 352, 365,
382, 428 (E)
70-80, 82-92,
115, 120-123,
126, 127, 131,
133, 137, 160-163,
174 (A)
77-112 P (nearly),
157, 177-179 (P),
51, 68, 69, 82 (Apoc.)
7, 60, 81, 86 (Evst.)
12 (Apost.)
</p>

<p>
Scio      390 (E)
</p>

<p>
Scrivener      N<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>c</hi>, W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi> (E), G (P)
59, 66, 71, 201,
299, 300, 440,
492, 503, 507-517,
545-559,
566 (E),
61, 178, 182-188 (A),
252-261 (P),
87, 93-98 (Apoc.)
221, 233, 234 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Scultet, A.      96 (E)
</p>

<p>
Seguier      34-41 (E)
</p>

<p>
Seidel, A. E.      G, H (E), 42 (A)
</p>

<p>
Sepulveda      B. p. 109
</p>

<p>
Sergius      B, p. 118
</p>

<p>
Simcox, W. H.      624 (E), 72 (Apoc.)
</p>

<p>
Simenus, Monast.      53 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Simeon      312 (P), 179 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Simon      K (E)
</p>

<p>
Simonides, Const.      110, 589 (E), 229
(A)
</p>

<p>
Simopetra      218 (A)
</p>

<p>
Sinai, St. Cath., Mon.      א, p. 90; 141, 413,
577, 581, 582 (E)
</p>

<p>
Sirlet, Card.      373 (E), 79 (Apoc.),
132 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Smalbroke, S.      484 (E)
</p>

<p>
Smyrna      444 (E)
</p>

<p>
Sophonius      1262 (E)
</p>

<p>
Sophronius      183 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Sotheby      265 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Sparvenfeldt      613 (E), 68 (A)
</p>

<p>
Statius, A.      69, 171 (E)
</p>

<p>
Steininger      179 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Stella, P.      284 (E)
</p>

<p>
Stephen, priest      102 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, R.      D, p. <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>
L (E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, reader      90 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Stevens       268 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Stierzienbecher, A. F.      614 (E)
</p>

<p>
Stosch      D (P), p. 175
</p>

<p>
Strangford      526 (E)
</p>

<p>
Strasburg      180 (A)
</p>

<p>
Stunica      52 (A)
</p>

<p>
Suchtelen      542 (E)
</p>

<p>
Sussex, Duke of      543 (E)
</p>

<p>
Swete, H. B.      736 (E)
</p>

<p>
Sylburg, F.      79 (Apoc.)
</p>

<p>
Symeon      76, 269 (Apost.)
</p>

<p>
Synesius      585 (E)
</p>

<p>
Syria      515 (E)
</p>

<p>
Taurinus, St., Monast.      91 (E)
</p>

<p>
Tauronesus      1261 (E)
</p>

<p>
Tayler, F.      222 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Teller of Rheims      119, 284, 285, 304
(E)
</p>

<p>
Tengnagel, S.      66 (A)
</p>

<p>
Teudatus      493 (E)
</p>

<p>
Thecla      A, p. 98
</p>

<p>
Theocletus      988 (E)
</p>

<p>
Theodora      388, 473 (E)
</p>

<p>
Theodore, Abp.      E (A)
74, 233, 412, 543,
571 (E)
156 (A)
</p>

<p>
Theodoret      97 (A), 122 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Theodosius      413 (E)
</p>

<p>
Theognostus      99 (A)
</p>

<p>
Theopemptus      131 (A)
</p>

<p>
Theophanes      416 (A)
</p>

<p>
Theophilus      570 (E)
</p>

<p>
Theophylact, priest      148 (A)
</p>

<p>
Thessaly      175, 288 (P)
</p>

<p>
Thevenot      272 (E)
</p>

<p>
Thomas      1262 (E)
</p>

<p>
Thorpe      528 (E)
</p>

<p>
Thou, de, Aug.      121 (A), 63 (Apoc.),
60 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Tiffin, W.      69 (E)
</p>

<p>
Timotheus      103 (P)
</p>

<p>
Tischendorf      א, p. <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>.
B, p. <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>.
Γ, Θ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>, Θ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>bd</hi>, Θ<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi>, Λ (E),
O<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi> (P),
C, p. <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>.
E, F<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>, G, H, I, K,
L, P, Q, R, S, T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>s</hi>,
T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>c</hi>, U, X, Ξ, Π (E),
E, H, L (A), D,
F, R (P),
620, 621 (E), 61
(A), 175, 295-297
(Evst.),   72
(Apost.)
</p>

<pb n='418'/><anchor id='Pg418'/>

<p>
Titoff      476 (E)
</p>

<p>
Torregiani      162 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Traheron, P.      71 (E)
</p>

<p>
Tregelles      E, G, H, K, M, R,
U, X, Γ, Δ, Λ, Ξ
(E)
H, L, P (A), D, F,
M (P)
1, 33, 69, 241 (E)
61 (A), 1 (Apoc.)
</p>

<p>
Treschow      N (E), 77, 124 (E)
</p>

<p>
Trithemius, Jo.      96 (E)
</p>

<p>
Troyna, St. Michael de      96 (A)
</p>

<p>
Twycross      63 (E)
</p>

<p>
Tzutzuna      89 (A)
</p>

<p>
Ubaldi      B, p. <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>
</p>

<p>
Uffenbach      M (P)
45 (A)
</p>

<p>
Urbino, Ducal Lib.      157 (E)
</p>

<p>
Uspensky, P.      481 (E)
</p>

<p>
Ussher, Abp.      D, p. <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>,
61, 63, 64 (E)
</p>

<p>
Vatablus      9 (A)
</p>

<p>
Vatopedi Monast.      245 (E), 106 (A),
124 (P),
54 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Velitrant Museum      180 (E)
</p>

<p>
Venice      613 (E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, St. Michael's       419, 468 (E)
</p>

<p>
Vercellone      B, p. 117
</p>

<p>
Vergecius      296 (E), 124 (A),
149, 151 (P)
</p>

<p>
Verschoyle, Bp.      64 (E)
</p>

<p>
Victor, St., on the Walls      120 (E)
</p>

<p>
Voscius, Gerard      X (E)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, Is.      38 (A)
</p>

<p>
Wagstaff      517 (E)
</p>

<p>
Wake, Abp.      73, 74 (E).  <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Index I, Christ Church, Oxford
</p>

<p>
Walker, F.      422, 423, 495 (E),
191 (A), 218, 219,
(Apoc.)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, J.      3, 73, 74 (E), 2
(Apost.)
</p>

<p>
Walton      64 (E)
</p>

<p>
Wanley      484 (E)
</p>

<p>
Ward      81 (E)
</p>

<p>
Wepfer      F (P)
</p>

<p>
Werner      B, p. <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>
</p>

<p>
Westermann      42 (A)
</p>

<p>
Westminster      20 (A)
</p>

<p>
Wetstein, C.      492, 503 (E), 6,
26-28 (Apoc.)
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;, F.      C, p. <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>,
E, F, F<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi>, L, M, N (E),
D, E, F (P),
1, 2, 33, 41, 90, 92,
94 (E),
15, 21 (A), 25, 26
(P), 6, 7 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Wheeler      68 (E)
</p>

<p>
Wiedmann      405 (E)
</p>

<p>
Wigley      24 (A)
</p>

<p>
Williams      562 (E)
</p>

<p>
Winchelsea, Earl of      106 (E)
</p>

<p>
Woide      T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>s</hi> or T<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>wol</hi> (E)
</p>

<p>
Wolff      G, H (E), M (P),
90 (E)
</p>

<p>
Woodhouse      563-5 (E), 223 (A),
255 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Wordsworth, Bp. Chr.      542 (E)
</p>

<p>
Wright      R (E)
53 (A)
</p>

<p>
Xenophon (Athos)      536 (E)
</p>

<p>
Zacagni      151 (Evst.)
</p>

<p>
Zittau, Senate of      605 (E)
</p>

<p>
Zomozerab      179 (A)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>END OF VOL. I.</hi>
</p>

</div>
</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
